"Timely and important. A clear and provocative book about the
power of expectation and the endless mystery of the human mind."
—Tara Westover, #1 New York Times
bestselling author of Educated
"A sensational guide to a more psychologically rich life."
-Angela Duckworth, New York Times
bestselling author of Grit
*In Look Again, Sharot and Sunstein offer an insightful look into
the science of habituation. Their insights into the why and how of
getting used to things teach us how to hack habituation to bring
more joy to our lives. A surprising and delightful book."
-Annie Duke, bestselling author of Thinking in Bets
"Look Again is the perfect book to help you refresh your point
of view. Sharot and Sunstein reveal why it's easy to be lulled into
complacency about anything and how to prevent falling into
this trap. In the bargain, they'll help you live a happier, healthier,
wiser, and more just life."
-Katy Milkman, bestselling author of How to Change
"Such a vivid, human, and original book-the perfect guide to
perking up everything from your creativity to your love life."
-Tim Harford, author of How to Make the World Add Up
"Look Again is a fascinating guide to how and why our biased
minds get used to stuff and how we can fight through our usual
adaptations. It's a must-read for anyone who wants to feel happier,
stay more present, and make healthier, more effective decisions."
—Laurie Santos, Chandrika and Ranjan Tandon
Professor of Psychology at Yale University and
host of The Happiness Lab podcast
LOOI
AGAI
THE POWER OF NC
WHAT WAS ALWAY
Tali Sharot ar
Cass R. Sunste
ONE SIGNAL
PUBLISHERS
ATRIA
New York • Amsterdam/Antwerp • London • Toronto •10
PROGRESS:
BREAKING THE CHAINS
LOW EXPECTATIONS
We must learn how to be surprised.
Not to adjust ourselves.
- ABRAHAM JOSHUA HESCHEL!
IN THE EARLY 1950S a small child named Jorge
the circus in his hometown of Buenos Aires.?
spectacular: trapeze artists, clowns, jugglers, me
were daring feats of courage and breathtakin
then there were the animals!
Because of concerns about animal welfare,
are now rare, but back in the 1950s they wer
Monkeys, parrots, and, of course, elephants. The
trained to play musical instruments, ride a bicyc
The gigantic elephants were often the children's
Jorge too loved the elephants. After the end
mance, Jorge noticed something mysterious o
179180
LOOK AGAIN
the large elephant was chained by the foot to a small stake in
the ground. Young Jorge found this baffling. The stake was just
a tiny piece of wood, and the elephant was so big and strong.
Surely the elephant could easily free itself and flee? Why didn't
it do so?
None of the adults seemed to know. The question stayed
with Jorge until fifty years later, when he finally met a knowl-
edgeable man with an answer. When the elephant was just
a baby, the man explained, it had been attached to a tiny
pole that was partially driven into the ground. The little ele-
phant tried desperately to set itself free, but small as it was, it
could not. It tried and tried again. But after a while, the little
elephant simply accepted its fate. As the elephant grew, it
gained enormous strength; it could uproot mature trees and
lift heavy stones. It could easily have escaped, but it never
tried.
Perhaps it did not occur to the elephant that it now could,
or that a different life was possible. The constraint was no lon-
ger in the elephant's muscles. It was in its mind.
The elephant seemed to have habituated to the limitations
on its movements at a young age and stopped rebelling against
them. Maybe it no longer considered the limitations to be lim-
itations. Perhaps the elephant eventually perceived its limited
range of movement in the same way that human beings think
about their inability to fly like birds— just a matter of fact. So
the elephant was less angry, less frightened, and less sad. But
still, it was trapped.
Progress: Breaking the chains of low exp
WOMEN IN CHAINS
In the United States prior to 1974 it was pe
matter of federal law, to deny a woman a crec
her gender. Before 1968, it was legal to deny a
because she was a woman. Before 1964, it wa
woman a job based on her sex. In many state
exclude women from juries. Women did not h
many found it difficult to obtain higher educati
teresting jobs, and when they did, they were n
as men. Women were doing most of the house
childcare (as they still do). Yet, the data shows 1
and 1960s women were not less happy than me
were asked how happy they were on a scale rai
happy" to "not too happy, their ratings were e
men, and some studies suggest that women we
than men. They also seemed to have as muc
men. How could that be?
For thousands of years, women lacked right
and were subject to pervasive discrimination. W
vote; they could not own property; in many case
choose whom to marry. They were chained. Whi
fought these chains and made important pro
whelming majority accepted life as it was. Hab
thing, and like the elephant, most women did no
pect that many were partially blind to those chai
realizing that a different life could be possible. C
them. Low expectations meant that women wer
when they were denied education, jobs, and prop182
LOOK AGAIN
Eventually, however, the group of women who did attempt
to cut the chains grew and strengthened. With the help of the
women's rights movement, large gains were made in the 1970s,
1980s, 1990s, and onward. In many nations, antidiscrimina-
tion laws were introduced, and many more women obtained
higher education and participated in the job market. But as
the chains became weaker, something unexpected happened.
Women did not become happier. In fact, their happiness de-
clined to such an extent that on many measures men were
now happier than women. This pattern was observed not only
in the United States but also in Belgium, Denmark, France,
Great Britain, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Nether-
lands, Portugal, and Spain, among others.*
This does not mean that inequality and discrimination are
good things. Not at all. But it raises some serious puzzles.
If you look at women's self-reported well-being across coun-
tries, you find that as societal conditions for women become
better, women often report lower life satisfaction. Women seem
to report that they are happier in countries where inequality is
greater. Let's consider why.
Today, in many Western nations, women are told they have
rights equivalent to those of men—to be an astronaut, an in-
vestment banker, a judge, and even a prime minister or presi-
dent. Women have the legal right to be paid as much as men,
so they compare their achievements to those of their male
counterparts. But guess what?
In reality, opportunities are not close to equal. Women
have legal rights in many countries, even equal rights, yes, but
much of the time, discrimination continues in multiple forms.
Progress: Breaking the chains of low expe
Women are told that household chores shou
vided between partners. Yet women around th
to do the laundry, the shopping, the childca
the cooking, the form filling, the homework l
that even in cases when their jobs are more
those of their male partners. Even when the u
breadwinner in the family, they still spend th
of time on household chores as their unemp
Those women do not only earn the bread, the
and make the children's lunch sandwiches toc
In contrast, in the 1950s in the United St
countries) while women also did the majori
chores, many did not have the highest aspirati
est expectations, at least for those things thi
able to them. They habituated to existing s
contrast, women in modern Western societies
Yet, daily, that expectation is not fulfilled.
This gap between what you expect (equal p
tunity, respect) and what you get (less pay, 1
nity, disrespect) creates unhappiness. Neurosc
gap between expectations and outcomes a ne
error. As we will soon see, while these predicti
unhappiness in the short term, they are critic
SURPRISE!
You may not be aware of it, but at this very mo
is trying to predict what will come next. What184
LOOK AGAIN
word in this... (yes) sentence; how will the page of this book
feel against your hand when you turn the page; how will the
coffee taste as you move the hot mug toward your lips. If you
make good predictions, you will not be surprised by the tem-
perature of the liquid or the next word you read.
You also make longer-term predictions. "I will get the as-
sistant manager job at the bank, "Georgina is going to leave
me, "It is going to be freezing up on the ski slope." The reason
almost every neuron in your brain is engaged in some sort of
prediction is obvious-by predicting what will come next you
will be better prepared. If you are well prepared, you will avoid
freezing on the slope or losing your house to Georgina.
But sometimes you are wrong. Surprise! You didn't get the
job at the bank. Surprise! Georgina stays with you forever.
These mistakes (or prediction errors) are important-they
are "teaching signals" from which you can learn about the
world around you and correct your expectations. Some of the
mistakes are wonderful ("Georgina stayed!") and some are not
so wonderful ("Didn't get the job!"). Your brain must have a
clear signal that indicates whether the surprise is good or bad.
This is because if the surprise is good, you should continue
doing what you were doing (be nice to Georgina and tell her
you love her), but if the surprise is bad, you need to change
something (edit your CV, get more experience). So, while some
neurons in your brain simply signal "Surprise!" others code for
two types of surprises- good and bad. Perhaps the most "fa-
mous" are the dopaminergic neurons.
Dopaminergic neurons synthesize the neurotransmitter
dopamine. A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is released
Progress: Breaking the chains of low ex,
by one neuron to another neuron as a way
a message. Dopaminergic neurons are cons
when nothing much is going on, they are
something is surprising in a good way ("She
fire even more, signaling to the rest of the br
happened is better than expected. When
prising in a bad way ("No job offer!"), they qu
This unusual quietness delivers a mess:
the brain: What just happened is worse than
first signal is called a positive prediction erro
a negative prediction error. Prediction errors
ciated with your mood. When positive prec
triggered, you feel great, and when negative
are triggered, you feel bad.
Broadly speaking, women in the 1950s ma
negative prediction errors than women in th
women in the 1950s had low expectations and
be negatively surprised. The same logic follows
narios. When people adapt their expectation
rible conditions (such as corruption, poor hea
to a stick) do not affect their happiness as mu
otherwise. Low expectations mean no negati
rors, which means that bad conditions daily m
LOW EXPECTATIONS
People's preferences adapt to what is available
Jon Elster® and Amartya Senio refer to this as186
LOOK AGAIN
"adaptive preferences": if you cannot have something, you might
end up not wanting it at all. Empirical evidence supports the
claim that people adapt to deprivation. In countries where peo-
ple have less freedom, freedom matters less to peoples well-being
because they don't expect to have it." They may have less auton-
omy, but because of habituation they might be able to maintain
a reasonable level of welfare. Income affects happiness the least
in Africa, which is also the poorest continent on earth, partly
because in Africa citizens have lower expectations.12 In Afghan-
istan, where crime and corruption are among the highest in the
world, crime and corruption affect peoples well-being the least, I3
To be clear, people in Afghanistan are not joyous. Poverty,
insecurity, and political instability have taken their toll. The
country ranks at the bottom of the world's list in happiness."*
Yet if you moved to Afghanistan tomorrow morning, we sus-
pect that you would be much less happy than the average cit-
izen there. Afghan citizens have, to some extent, habituated
to their circumstances and hold low expectations, just as the
circus elephant adapted to his. You, by contrast, have likely
grown accustomed to running water, sufficient food, and a
sense of security. The lack of any of these will produce a nega-
tive prediction error, one that will likely shake you to the core.
You may be thinking, "Okay, great, let's just all lower our
expectations and live happily ever after." It's hardly that simple.
Low expectations can lead to a big problem: you might stop
fighting the suboptimal conditions (or perhaps never even
begin). In Elster's words, "adaptive preferences have both a
numbing effect and a paralyzing effect: they alleviate the pain
while also blunting any urge to act." 15
Progress: Breaking the chains of low exp
You might stay in a relationship or a job
ideal or not try to alter it for the better. You
weak muscles instead of hitting the gym or
stant back pain instead of seeing a doctor. Do
demand for better health care is often lowei
need improvement the most compared to th
cellent care. 16 This is because people in natic
wonderful health care systems habituate; th
they might be satisfied, or not be horribly d
system that would frustrate and shock peopl
So while unmet expectations cause unh
piness might be necessary for change. And ‹
pens, happiness can be regained. Let's take
as an example. At first, improving opportuni
tions for women lowered female happiness
tions improved beyond a certain point, thes
with happiness gains. The relationship t
freedom and well-being is U-shaped. Initial
rights appeared to produce reductions in sell
piness because expectations were mismat
Yet, as women's social conditions continuec
reality started to catch up with expectatio
creased.
In no place on earth do women have op
to men's. We do not know if in such a society
happy with their lives as men are. We may n
a society ourselves (thousands of years of
while to reverse), but we like to think that if
happen, the happiness gap will disappear.188
LOOK AGAIN
BREAKING THE CHAINS
The obvious conundrum is that no movement aimed at break-
ing chains could ever occur if habituation were universal and
complete. If it were, the conditions would be settled for all time.
One of George Orwell's characters put it chillingly in 1984: "If
you want a picture of the future, imagine a boot stamping on a
human face—forever." 18
For social movements to arise, there must be someone
who does not entirely habituate-who is uncomfortable with
some practice, or some situation, and who is willing to say or
do something about it.
Here is a highly stylized account of what sometimes hap-
pens. Society consists of a range of people, who are highly
diverse in their attitudes. Some people will have habituated
entirely to what exists, including injustice; they will take cur-
rent practices as background noise, or as a normal and natural
part of life. Other people will have habituated a lot; they will
hear a voice of protest in their heads, but that voice is rela-
tively quiet. Some people will have habituated only a little; at
some level they will be outraged or appalled, but they will be
keenly aware that change is difficult or unlikely, which means
that they will silence themselves.
What is the point-they might think-of beating one's
head against the wall? These people engage in preference fal-
sification; because of existing norms, they do not reveal what
they actually prefer and think. They might be willing to do
that, but only if norms start to shift.
In this stylized account, people also have diverse thresh-
Progress: Breaking the chains of low ex
olds for action. Those who have habituate
tirely willing to act, even if they stand alone
the zeros. Other people, who have habitua
willing to act, but not to go first; they need s
They are the ones. Other people will be wil
not go first or second; they need precursors.
The twos are followed by the threes, and
fours, and the fours by the fives, all the way
(understood as people who have fully habit
rebel under any circumstances.
In this account, change will arise on
kinds of social interactions. If the ones see t
will move; if the twos see the ones and the z
move; if the threes see the twos and the
will move too. We will eventually witness s
cascade, in which a large-scale movement te
But a mystery remains: How can we expla
do not habituate— the zeros? We do not hav
that question, but we think that part of it
exposure, at some stage, to something disha
thing that made existing practices no longer
inevitable, and that delivered a kind of jolt o
something might be a different practice in
or place; it might be an exercise of imaginati
some encounter or experience. We call these
uation entrepreneurs, and we will have a lot n
them in the next chapter.
We also believe that knowledge about
produce dishabituation entrepreneurs. That190
LOOK AGAIN
about all the ways people habituate, you may be able to de-
tect and focus on the suboptimal aspects of your life to which
you have become accustomed. You may notice those less for-
tunate features of your home life and work life, and of society,
that you have overlooked. Granted, in many situations you are
better off accepting things that are not perfect or even not at
all great. The hope, though, is that awareness of all the ways
our brains blind us to the constant and expected will help you
distinguish the "chains" you should accept from those you
should try to break.
DISCRIMINATIOI
THE GENTLE JEW, TI
MINISKIRT-WEARING SCI
AND THE CHILDREN WH
JUST NOT COOL
We shall remain prisoners of cult
unless we become aware of the proce
force ourselves to confront it.
-JOHN HOWARD GRIFFIN
IN THE SUMMER OF 2016, Margaret Sawyer, a
l of a not for profit, visited a pool in Salida, C
kids. She noticed a Red Cross poster pinnec
Take a close look at the poster on the next pa
Does anything about the poster strike you
Not long ago, Cass was in a group of ab
ple who were shown the poster and asked tha
people in the group did not notice much. But:
191