*Timely and important. A clear and provocative book about the
power of expectation and the endless mystery of the human mind."
-Tara Westover, #1 New York Times
bestselling author of Educated
*A sensational guide to a more psychologically rich life."
—Angela Duckworth, New York Times
bestselling author of Grit
*In Look Again, Sharot and Sunstein offer an insightful look into
the science of habituation. Their insights into the why and how of
getting used to things teach us how to hack habituation to bring
more joy to our lives. A surprising and delightful book."
-Annie Duke, bestselling author of Thinking in Bets
"Look Again is the perfect book to help you refresh your point
of view. Sharot and Sunstein reveal why it's easy to be lulled into
complacency about anything and how to prevent falling into
this trap. In the bargain, they'll help you live a happier, healthier,
wiser, and more just life."
-Katy Milkman, bestselling author of How to Change
"Such a vivid, human, and original book-the perfect guide to
perking up everything from your creativity to your love life."
-Tim Harford, author of How to Make the World Add Up
"Look Again is a fascinating guide to how and why our biased
minds get used to stuff and how we can fight through our usual
adaptations. It's a must-read for anyone who wants to feel happier,
stay more present, and make healthier, more effective decisions."
—Laurie Santos, Chandrika and Ranjan Tandon
Professor of Psychology at Yale University and
host of The Happiness Lab podcast
LOO
AGAI
THE POWER OF NC
WHAT WAS ALWAY
Tali Sharot a
Cass R. Sunste
ONE SIGNAL
PUALISHEPE
ATRIA
New York • Amsterdam/Antwerp • London • Toronto50
LOOK AGAIN
that joy peaked forty-three hours into a vacation. At the end
of day two, after people had settled in, they were the happiest.
Thereafter it was all downhill.
To be clear, most people did not end up miserable at the
end of the vacation. Even when they returned home, many still
berefited from some warm holiday afterglow. Still, less than
a week passed by before they quickly adjusted to home life—
work, school runs, bills. Within seven days, it was difficult to
detect any effect of the holiday on their mood at all.
This evidence suggests that all else being equal you may ben-
efit the most from several small trips spread throughout the year
rather than one long escape. If you take a two-week vacation,
you may habituate to the wonders of the blue ocean and white
sand by day three. If however, you instead take two vacations of
only four days each a few months apart, you will experience the
"Wow!" of day one twice. Your overall pleasure will last longer.
You will maximize firsts and afterglows, not to mention the joy
of anticipating the wonderful vacation-imagining margaritas.
on the beach and the warmth of the sun-twice.
Of course, there are constraints to consider. Total travel
time is longer if you chop up vacations into mini-ones, which
may also make them more expensive. But that is not necessar-
ily so. You may, for example, choose two mini-vacations closer
to home over one faraway destination. In general, where possi-
ble you may want to chop up those pleasant experiences into
smaller ones. When seated at a nice table at a restaurant, go
visit the rowdy section at the back.
But when it comes to unpleasant, yet necessary, tasks and
experiences, consume them all at once.
3
SOCIAL MEDIA:
HOW TO WAKE UP FRO
TECHNOLOGICALLY INDUCE
We humans can adapt to a lot, it's easy to si
into a state of chronic stress and distraction
ever reflecting that things could be differ
- TIM HARFORDI
WO AND A HALF years ago Sam Holstein, ar
blogger, made what she considers to be one o
cisions of her life. Her choice was not adventur
moving to Alaska, becoming a pilot, or joining th
her much more mundane decision took only five
implement. But once it was done, her life chang
ways. As she sees it, that one action made her ha
relaxed, more productive, and more interesting, an
richer social life.2
Sam is not alone. Many others have made th
cision and report similar effects. Take Shovan C
5152
LOOK AGAIN
At first Shovan found it difficult to implement the change: "I
could not concentrate on my studies for a few days... but
I was determined not to go back to my previous life. I was
getting used to my new life.? After only a few short weeks he
adapted to his new life and found that he slept better, procras-
tinated less, exercised more, and eventually found a new job
and passion.
What was the magical decision that turned Sam's and
Shovar's lives around? you might well ask. Sam and Shovan
decided to quit social media. They deleted their accounts on
Facebook, Snapchat, Twitter, WeChat, and all the rest. But
is the experience of Sam and Shovan typical? That is, would
most of us benefit from quitting (or taking a break from) social
media? And if so, why?
A SCALER STUCK IN YOUR MOUTH
Life has some annoying and unpleasant tasks that are nev-
ertheless necessary to complete (going to the dentist, doing
your taxes, cleaning the toilet). In the last chapter, we recom-
mended that you "swallow those events whole," so as to allow
habituation to reduce the pain. For example, if you need to
have a few cavities filled, it might be better to do so in one
sitting. As you habituate to the noise of the electronic dental
scaler and the taste of liquid fluoride, you will suffer less than
if you were to fill each cavity on a separate day.
Now imagine an alternative reality in which an electronic
dental scaler was permanently attached to your mouth (we
Social Media: How to wake up from a technolo
know this is impossible, but roll with us
grade buzzing would be inside your head
months, maybe years. You would go to wor
game, have a romantic dinner —all with a bi
in your mouth. Because of habituation, yo
tice the buzz after a while. Nonetheless, the
interfere to some extent with your life enjo
to concentrate. But you might be unable to
what exactly is wrong.
Then one day your dentist decides it is
move the scaler from your mouth. The imp:
You are utterly surprised to learn how much
without that buzzing piece of metal.
Just as we often fail to appreciate the g
until they are taken away, so we also fail
impact of constant irritants, big and small,
longer, because we get used to them. You
enced the ending of a not-so-great long-terr
first you feel sad, but soon after you are surp
much calmer and happier you are. While yo
lationship, you were not fully aware of how
affecting your well-being, but after it was ove
crystal clear.
The only way to assess the impact of co
your life that may be harming you is to ta
them. This will allow you to dishabituate and
tors with fresh eyes.
Social media is a prime example of such a
of us, social media is like a constant buzzin54
LOOK AGAIN
our mouth. You may suspect it is clouding your days, but you
do not know if and to what extent that is so because of its
constant presence.
BREAKING BAD
We would be foolish to draw broad conclusions from a hand-
ful of anecdotes such as those involving Sam and Shovan. To
know whether breaking from social media is likely to improve
peoples life on average, large scientific studies are needed.
Luckily, a few such studies have been conducted, and they
offer some intriguing findings.
Let's say we asked you to deactivate your account on your
favorite social media platform (Facebook? YouTube? Insta-
gram? TikTok?). Would you agree to do so? No? Okay, what if
we offered you cash? Still no? What if it was just for one month?
How much would you ask in return for giving up scrolling, lik-
ing, and reposting for thirty days—$10, $100, $1,000? More?
This is the question economist Hunt Alicott and his coau-
thors asked 2,884 Facebook users. They offered users money
to deactivate their accounts for a month. Some people wanted
thousands of dollars, which the researchers simply could not
afford. But 60 percent of users said that they would be willing
to deactivate their accounts for $102 or less. Allcott and his
team could reasonably pay this, and they did. Their goal was to
test whether a Facebook detox made people happier.
According to one estimate, people with internet access
on average devote about two hours per day to social media
Social Media: How to wake up from a technol
and check-check-check their screens fifty
day. The world has more than 4.7 billion
So, you might think that these facts dem
net access, including use of social media, r
thing. If people love something, where's th
mists use the term consumer surplus to po
people get from what they consume. Beca
of the wonders of the internet comes at :
sumer surplus would seem to be spectacu
But Allcott was not sure. Yes, people cl
free will) to go on social media for many
they log on out of habit, unaware of the
being?
To test this possibility, Allcott and his
users who said they would take $102 or le:
into two groups. The "treatment group" de
counts for a month; the "control group" did
pants indicated how happy they were befo
the deactivation (or no deactivation). They
satisfied they were with their life and ansv
questions.
Before long, the data was in. Along ever
who deactivated their accounts were found
more. The Facebook-free group said that
and more satisfied with their lives. They w
depressed and anxious. In short, no Face
Leaving social media behind had an effe
akin to its effect on Sam and Shovan. It was
a dental scale from one's mouth. Suddenly,56
LOOK AGAIN
which people did not consciously notice but was nonetheless
taking a toll, was gone.
Allcott and his coauthors calculated that the increase in
peoples happiness from their Facebook detox was equivalent
to the increase in the average person's happiness from a $30,000
rise in income. That sounds like a pretty large increase.
Allcott's study is hardly the only one tying social media use
to reduced happiness. Consider a study headed by the Italian
Luca Braghieri, which examined the mental health data of
students in universities before and after Facebook was intro-
duced on their campuses. Mark Zuckerberg launched Face-
book in 2004 at Harvard. At first it was available only to users
who had a harvard.edu email account. This was done partially
to give the platform an air of exclusivity. For the next two years
Facebook slowly rolled out across U.S. colleges. After Harvard
came Columbia, next Stanford, then Yale. Slowly but surely,
Facebook opened its doors to many other colleges.
Braghieri and his team used this gradual rollout to test the
relationship between Facebook use and mental health: Stu-
dents' mental health across U.S. universities was documented
frequently with surveys, so Braghieri examined whether men-
tal health declined in each university shortly after Facebook
was launched on campus. It did. Each time Facebook made
its platform available at an institution, most students created
an account, and shortly thereafter the mental health of the
student body declined; happiness decreased, and symptoms
of depression increased. The students hit the worst were the
outsiders— those who lived off campus and did not belong to a
sorority or a fraternity-and those who were overweight.
Social Media: How to wake up from a technolo
Facebook became available to the rest c
and for the next ten years depressive episod
population increased by a staggering 83 per
establish causation, and we are skeptical of:
ber, but it is worth noting that Braghieri an
that at least a quarter of this increase is due 1
SHIFTING ADAPTATION LE
Why are Facebook users happier without
gained about sixty extra minutes per day or
ting the platform. One Facebook detoxer si
ing books and playing the piano, which I us
the phone took over." o People spent some
time with friends and family (and interest
other social media platforms). But we thin'
deeper reason why quitting Facebook ma
Social media misconfigures our perception
ters what we expect to experience and what
Consider our acquaintance Bob. Bob l
house in San Francisco and has a wonder
daughter. He is a well-known intellectual f
him a new name and changed some ident
some of you have read his books and foll
(he has about a quarter of a million follo
is satisfied with his life. However, his bliss
whenever he logs on to social media.
The reason? Every time he does so, he is58
LOOK AGAIN
citing lives of his even more famous friends. "I think to myself,
'Why was I not invited to give a talk at this fabulous confer-
ence?" He wonders, "How come I did not get to meet the presi-
dent?" His life and career, which we view as exceptional, appear
a bit dim to him in the light of his über-successful colleagues.
Many of us have experienced something like that. You
might log on to your favorite platform while sipping your
morning coffee and learn that Fiona is currently on a sunny
beach in the Bahamas, that Georgina's daughter has just been
admitted to Yale, and that Patricia sold her start-up to Google
for a fortune (these might be extreme cases, but you get the
picture). "What am I doing with my life?" you may wonder.
In other words, your adaptation level shifts. This is the level
of a stimulus (such as money, love, followers) to which you
have habituated emotionally so that you experience it as neu-
tral. This level is largely set by your recent experiences."!
Let's take income. If you earned about $130,000 a year for
the last few years, you would not feel especially elated or sad
when you earn $130,000 again this year—$130,000 is the level
to which you had adapted. But if you receive a promotion and
now earn $150,000, you will be excited for a while. Soon, how-
ever, $150,000 will become your neutral point-your adapta-
tion level would shift from $130,000 to $150,000.
Here is the interesting bit. Although we usually assume
that your adaptation level is a function of what you have di-
rectly experienced, it can also shift as a result of factors be-
yond your personal experience. One such factor, for instance,
is your expectations.!2 Consider, for example, the following
finding: prisoners report being especially frustrated just be-
Social Media: How to wake up from a techno
fore they are set free. 13 During those last f
in their cells, but in their minds they are
the fence. This mental anticipation shift
"normal" from incarcerated to free. But ir
locked up in a small prison cell. This gap t
negative reaction that some prisoners m
cision to try to escape only weeks before t
What we consider "bad," "great" or ju
what we think others are getting. Studie
you are happy with your sex life depends
believe is happening in other people's bed
fits, relationships, real estate-how happ
you have depends partially on what you l
Anyone who has two (or more) childre
in action. If, on a bright Sunday morning,
ter, Daria, two blueberry pancakes with n
son, Samuel, just one, Samuel is likely to
possibly a lot more upset than he would
nothing at all to either. The late Antonin S
Court justice who had multiple children,
Parents know that children will accep
sorts of arbitrary substantive disposi
sion in the afternoon, or no televisio
or even no television at all. But try to I
sister watch television when the other
will feel the fury of the fundamental se
leashed. The Equal Protection Clause e
more than any other provision of the CLOOK AGAIN
In this respect (and in many other respects), adults are not
so different from children. We are wired to compare and con-
trast what we have with what others have (or what we think
they have) because doing so motivates us to strive for more
and to try harder. On a social level, this will lead to progress
(which is good). But it can make it difficult to be happy with
what we have.
Human beings have been comparing their life with that of
others since the dawn of time. You can imagine your ancestors
comparing the size and comfort level of their cave with that
of their next-door neighbor. Yet, today compare-and-contrast
has reached a whole new level. First, we do not simply com-
pare our lives with those of the people living next door. No,
today we compare our lives with those of people from all walks
of life living across the globe, including the rich and famous.
Second, we no longer compare our lives with the real lives of
others, but we compare our lives with the highly edited lives
of others.
Let's return to Bob. Without social media, Bob experiences
his (privileged) life as good, even great. But after browsing
through social media, his reference point changes and now
his life does not seem all that wonderful. The irony is that
Bob's perception of his friends' lives is unrealistic. It is based
on what they choose to post, which is a biased selection of
the events of their lives. Their lives are probably not nearly as
amazing as they appear online. We would not be surprised if
many of Bob's friends (including those who seem especially
successful) do not feel as thrilled about their own existences
after they view Bob's posts.
Social Media: How to wake up from a technol
Because Bob has been logging on to so
for years, he is not fully aware of the impac
his well-being. He is not fully aware of h
gram, YouTube, and all the rest have shift
leading to a constant feeling of mild dise
quit social media for a month, he might fee
study participants who said, "I was way le
I found I didn't really care so much abo
happening [online] because I was more i
life.... I felt more content. I think I was in
erally. I thought I would miss seeing ev
activities ….. I really didn't miss it at all."
stant tracking of others, the dust would lif
might resparkle (or at least seem "good e
"not quite up to standard").
A CATCH
But there is a catch. In Allcott's study, th
people felt did come at a cost. Those who
happier, but they also knew less about po
news. They may have been happier in part
less about the issues of the day. The type of
tend to receive on Facebook-not only a
about family and friends-may not make
does tell them things they would like to kr
One of the Facebook quitters said he
those [online] conversations, or just from62
LOOK AGAIN
of what people are doing or thinking... I didn't like it at first
at all, I felt very cut off? You might want not to feel cut off,
even if you end up a bit less anxious, less depressed, and more
satisfied with your life.
So despite indicating they were happier without Facebook,
once the month was up, and the participants in Allcott's study
could reactivate their accounts, many did. People had expe-
rienced a Facebook-free life, which on average made them
happier, but then went straight back onto the platform. Per-
haps they wanted to learn what was going on in their country,
even if what they learned made them sad, mad, and anxious.
Perhaps they were concerned they would be missing out on
networking opportunities and other professional prospects.
Or perhaps they thought that if one lives in a society in which
countless people are using a certain platform, one should con-
tinue to use that platform as well.
The choice they were making, however, was better in-
formed. They had the experience of "breaking bad"; they could
compare the benefits of a life without social media to the
costs. Some decided to stay offline, while most decided to log
back on.
It is not unusual to see people suffer from interactions on
social media and yet stay on it. We are not just speaking of
Bob's minor injuries, or of learning that some people are doing
better than you are.
Not long ago one of Tali's friends, let's call her Miriam, came
to Tali in tears after experiencing what Miriam perceived to be
online harassment on Twitter. The ongoing harassment had a
significant impact on Miriam's mental health. She could not
Social Media: How to wake up from a technolog
sleep; she could not work. Her self-esteem v
suggested that Miriam log off.
With incredulity, Miriam answered, "L
widened, and she seemed alarmed. Altho
clearly made Miriam miserable, leaving soc
a couple of months, was not an option in t
strong urge to log on to Twitter several tir
the negative consequences, looks somewha
Addiction happens when a certain beha
ing, smoking, eating, exercising, posting) ge
ous urge to engage in that behavior despite i
Part of the reason is that not engaging in th
pain and suffering. That is, Miriam feels an
not on Twitter. To reduce that anxiety, she lo
feel terrible when she reads nasty commer
first joined Twitter, she did not suffer at all
Twitter. That suffering emerged slowly over
logged on, which created a vicious cycle. St
make herself feel better, but every time she d
not logging on increased when she was off.
If you have experienced substance ab
someone who has, you have likely seen this
Rush, a signatory to the Declaration of Inde
early researcher on addiction, was once tol
"Were a keg of rum in one corner of a room a
constantly discharging balls between me a
refrain from passing before that cannon, in
rum." 19
Some economists say that you are addic64
LOOK AGAIN
if (1) today's consumption increases tomorrow's demand (the
more Miriam logs on, the more she logs on) and (2) you con-
sume more than you wish you had (when Miriam logs off, she
wishes she had spent less time on),20 The first condition sug-
gests a slippery slope: you begin with a little of the addictive
substance (whether it is wine, cocaine, or something else),
which leads to more and more and more consumption. The
urge (to smoke, eat chocolate, watch TikTok videos) increases
and increases. But guess what? Your enjoyment of the object
of your desire does not increase.
This is partly due to habituation. On your first day on social
media, you might be excited and even amazed to see that your
post has gotten (say) ten likes. Wow, ten actual human beings
enjoyed your words! How wonderful! But on your second day,
ten likes might not have much of an impact. You might need
twenty, or perhaps fifty, to get the same emotional boost that
you got from ten on the first day. Because people have a weaker
emotional response to a repeated stimulus, they need larger
and larger quantities of that stimulus to achieve an equivalent
high. That is one reason that addicts sometimes overdose.
The second condition-you consume more than you wish
you had -suggests that if you help people consume less, they
will. This is exactly what happens with social media-if you
make it easier for people to stay away, many do.
Think about your own behavior. Would you like to spend
less time on social media? In one study,? two thousand Insta-
gram and Facebook users were asked to install Phone Dash-
board, an app that allows people to set time limits on their
screen use. They could use the app if they so desired. Desire
Social Media: How to wake up from a fechnolog
they did. Almost 80 percent of the people 1
they reduced their screen time by 16 percen
Once the app was installed, the users r
were less likely
• to use their phone longer than intend
• to use their phone to distract from anxie
• to have difficulty putting down their p
• to lose sleep from phone use,
• to procrastinate by using their phone,
• to use their phone mindlessly.
Let us be clear. We are hardly suggesting
has only negative effects. It is a place to con
share. People certainly gain knowledge, frie
on these platforms. What we are saying is ti
ple, such as Sam and Shovan, using certain f
ferently, or not at all will lead to happier anc
lives. Many people suspect as much, and t
change their use to test the effects of soci:
lives. They need help to do so.
QUALITY, NOT QUANTIT
There is a large debate on whether more scre
you. We think the debate misses something
matters is not screen time. What matters is
that time. It's not only a question of wheth66
LOOK AGAIN
time on Facebook or CNN. It is a question of what type of in-
formation you are consuming. Are you scrolling through peo-
ple's fake photos and curated shares, or through posts about
new books or scientific discoveries?
One factor that may matter a lot is whether you are expos-
ing yourself to negative information. Are you spending hours
reading angry tweets and anxiety-inducing blogs? Tali and
her colleague Chris Kelly wanted to find out if the negative
information people consume online may be harmful to their
well-being. 22
They recruited a few hundred participants and asked them
to go online every day for about half an hour and then send
Chris their anonymized browsing history. They also com-
pleted a large battery of tests that assessed their mental health.
Chris then extracted the text from the websites each person
browsed and used a simple algorithm to calculate the percent-
age of negative words on each. He found that the greater this
percentage was, the worse off people were.
You may wonder: What precedes what? Do people who
have worse moods tend to seek out more negative informa-
tion? Or do people who tend to find more negative information
end up sad and anxious? To figure this out, Chris manipulated
the information people consumed. He gave some people emo-
tionally neutral web pages to browse and others web pages
with lots of negative words, then asked all how they felt.
As you would expect, those who browsed negative web
pages felt worse. He also manipulated their moods and ex-
amined the information they then chose to consume. Indeed,
when Chris triggered negative feelings in people, they browsed
Social Media: How to wake up from a technologi
web pages that were more negative. This me
proportion of what you read is negative, it
you mentally. But if you are in a bad mood, y
to consume a lot of negative information.
When it comes to browsing, it is not as m
is quality. But it also matters who you are—
sensitive to messages of anger and fear, or ar
ient? Do you tend to compare yourself to oth
your own thing? Different people will be affe
Because of habituation, however, it is d
how "online noise" really affects your life. I
pact of things that are constant is hard. We
the interference caused by a TV that is on in
until someone suddenly turns it off. Shovan
prised that there is less distraction" after he:
media habits.?3 The only way to know is to ch
patterns and experiment with less or differer
might be surprised about what happens next