Timely and important. A clear and provocative book about the
power of expectation and the endless mystery of the human mind."
—Tara Westover, #1 New York Times
bestselling author of Educated
"A sensational guide to a more psychologically rich life."
-Angela Duckworth, New York Times
bestselling author of Grit
*In Look Again, Sharot and Sunstein offer an insightful look into
the science of habituation. Their insights into the why and how of
getting used to things teach us how to hack habituation to bring
more joy to our lives. A surprising and delightful book."
—Annie Duke, bestselling author of Thinking in Bets
"Look Again is the perfect book to help you refresh your point
of view. Sharot and Sunstein reveal why it's easy to be lulled into
complacency about anything and how to prevent falling into
this trap. In the bargain, they'll help you live a happier, healthier,
wiser, and more just life."
-Katy Milkman, bestselling author of How to Change
"Such a vivid, human, and original book-the perfect guide to
perking up everything from your creativity to your love life."
—Tim Harford, author of How to Make the World Add Up
"Look Again is a fascinating guide to how and why our biased
minds get used to stuff and how we can fight through our usual
adaptations. It's a must-read for anyone who wants to feel happier,
stay more present, and make healthier, more effective decisions."
—Laurie Santos, Chandrika and Ranjan Tandon
Professor of Psychology at Yale University and
host of The Happiness Lab podcast
LOO
AGAI
THE POWER OF N
WHAT WAS ALWA
Tali Sharot c
Cass R. Suns
ONE SIGNAL
PUBLISHERS
ATRIA
New York • Amsterdam/Antwerp • London • Toront190
LOOK AGAIN
about all the ways people habituate, you may be able to de-
tect and focus on the suboptimal aspects of your life to which
you have become accustomed. You may notice those less for-
tunate features of your home life and work life, and of society,
that you have overlooked. Granted, in many situations you are
better off accepting things that are not perfect or even not at
all great. The hope, though, is that awareness of all the ways
our brains blind us to the constant and expected will help you
distinguish the "chains" you should accept from those you
should try to break.
DISCRIMINATIC
THE GENTLE JEW,
MINISKIRT-WEARING SC
AND THE CHILDREN WI
JUST NOT COO
We shall remain prisoners of cu
unless we become aware of the pro
force ourselves to confront i
-JOHN HOWARD GRIFFIN
IN THE SUMMER OF 2016, Margaret Sawyer,
of a not for profit, visited a pool in Salida,
kids. She noticed a Red Cross poster pinn
Take a close look at the poster on the next I
Does anything about the poster strike y
Not long ago, Cass was in a group of :
ple who were shown the poster and asked t
people in the group did not notice much. Bu
191192
LOOK AGAIN
Be Cool, Follow The Rules
No! Cop
Cass's group immediately saw something: The "Not Cool" label
is associated almost entirely with children of color. After the
group's attention was drawn to the association, everyone in
the group saw it-and they were amazed that they had not
seen it before. Once it was pointed out, people could not not
see it.
When the Red Cross initially released the poster, no one in
the organization detected the problem (or at least none spoke
up if they did). The poster was posted on billboards of numer-
ous pools and no one complained.
Until Margaret Sawyer came along.
When she first noticed it in the Salida pool, she assumed
that it was an anomaly— a vintage poster. But that same week-
end she saw the same poster in a pool in Fort Morgan, Col-
orado. She realized it was not a 1970s poster—it was part of
Discrimination: The jew, scientist, and children v
a recent campaign. She took a photo of
her Twitter account. At first, many users c
wrong. "I don't get it. What is racist about
ment read. Once Margaret pointed out the
a public outcry followed. The media picke
the Red Cross apologized for "this inadver
The key word here is inadvertent. The
mean to release a racist ad. Rather, the peo
were not aware it was one. Pool workers
who pinned the poster to bulletin boards,
ther. Neither did thousands of poolgoers a
ter users. But one person-Margaret Sa
that. She was person zero.
In a world where bias and discrimina
most people become habituated to them.
the discrimination around us because we e
time: we notice what is surprising and diffe
what is the same and anticipated. And her
we cannot work to change what we do
someone comes along and makes what is
and salient.
THE GENTLE JEW
A few decades ago, Cass was invited to go
advise some members of the all-white apar
about a possible constitution for a postapar
had some trepidation about accepting the194|
LOOK AGAIN
fore doing so, he was assured that those who were involved
were strongly in favor of racial equality, and that they hoped
to help design a constitution that would eliminate the legacy
of apartheid. During his visit, Cass got along particularly well
with one of the South African judges, a leader of the effort, who
was sharp, learned, and amiable. Cass liked the judge, and the
judge seemed to like him.
At the final dinner, and after a few drinks, the judge re-
peated Cass's last name about six times, with what seemed
to be mild displeasure and perhaps a little confusion: "Sun-
stein, Sunstein, Sunstein, Sunstein, Sunstein, Sunstein." Cass
thought that was peculiar and perhaps not entirely friendly.
What was so interesting about his last name? He looked at the
judge quizzically.
The judge paused and then said, "We have a Jew on our
court. We call him the Gentle Jew."
Cass was startled by this statement. The judge meant to be
amusing; he had no idea that his utterance might seem odd or
inappropriate. Looking around the table, Cass immediately no-
ticed that no one else at the dinner seemed to take note of the
incident, or even to think that there had been an incident. Cass
was quite certain that this type of behavior would have caused a
reaction in his own country. But what is unusual and attention-
grabbing in one culture is often unnoticeable in another.
Norms change across time and place. Certain acts and
comments will stand out in one culture or decade, but not in
another. We habituate to the norms that we live with. Trans-
porting ourselves from one place to another, or from one de-
cade to another (for example, when watching old films), enables
Discrimination: The Jew, scientist, and children wi
us to see what others in that place and per
ample, smoking is fine and cool in some tin
even romantic, but in other times and pla
you do not care about yourself or others. Per
to the presence of smokers, and then they g
In some countries the word homo is con
scribe a gay person. People in those coun
when they hear it or use it, and most are cc
that in other places it is considered a slur a
citizen of the latter country travels to the fo
slur, the person will be jarred and probably 1
Whether we will, or will not, perceive sc
criminatory depends on what we are used
ment, but it may also depend on which si
are on-one group or another. About ten ye
a science meeting with about a dozen peo
sor was chairing the meeting. He turned t
and mentioned that he had heard through
she had received an invitation to give a tal
tigious. He asked, "Did they invite you so y
a miniskirt onstage?" The comment was m
yet it did not seem that anyone took note.
tinued as usual.
Not so long ago, such comments were
usual. Male professors would often comme
ance of women scientists. One woman, a
was labeled "rather large" and another "qu
you able to sit beside her and concentrate?
asked a male student, referring to the stude196
LOOK AGAIN
Later Tali emailed the professor from the science meeting,
who immediately issued an apology-in retrospect he could
see the problem. Tali also asked her colleagues who were in
attendance, almost all men, about the incident. Some did not
notice it; others did not think it was of much importance. Such
comments occurred daily and so it was nothing unusual. The
one other person who did take offense was a female colleague.
Which leads us to an interesting question- do those who are
subjected to bias habituate to it less? To what extent are they
more likely to perceive it?
IN ANOTHER'S SHOES
When we experience discrimination repeatedly, we learn to
expect it to some degree, at least in its less egregious forms. We
habituate, just as the elephant did to its chains, and women
prior to the 1970s did to their positions. We are thus less likely
to respond than if discrimination were unusual. Nevertheless,
when you are on the receiving end of bias, you may habituate
more slowly and perhaps not perfectly. In Chariots of Fire, the
celebrated film about British Olympians from the 1920s, Har-
old Abrahams, the Jewish sprinter, captures the feeling well:
It's an ache, a helplessness, an anger. One feels humili-
ated. Sometimes I say to myself, "Hey, steady on, you're
imagining all this." And then I catch that look again.
Catch it on the edge of a remark, feel a cold reluctance
in a handshake.*
Discrimination: The Jew, scientist, and children wt
Why are victims of discrimination less
than onlookers? One reason, we suspect,
discrimination is frequent, it contrasts wi
has of oneself. A female pilot may, to som
to the possibility that others believe that s
than most men, which may lower her conf
Yet such attitudes will still contrast with he
of skillfully controlling an aircraft. This mi
what we observe our abilities to be, and th
pectations of us—will lead to constant "er
brain, which will reduce the rate of habituat
It follows that if you transform yoursel
male, white to Black, or straight to gay, you
to perceive discrimination that you would
This is exactly what is reported by people
gone such changes.
Here is a famous and influential exampl
uation and dishabituation. In 1959 the journ
Griffin had his skin temporarily darkened,
pass as Black. For weeks, he traveled in the
visiting Georgia, Mississippi, Louisiana, Alal
sas. Griffin's motivation was simple: "If we c
selves in the shoes of others to see how we
we might become aware of the injustice of d
the tragic inhumanity of every kind of pre
book, Black Like Me, was a sensation.5
We acknowledge that many people are
the book, not because of its vivid portrayal
made it controversial at the time), but beca198
LOOK AGAIN
consider to be its presumptuousness. What we want to em-
phasize is that when it was published, it gave white people
a sense of what it would be like to be a Black person in the
South-to visit a kind of upside-down world in which one
would be treated with rage, brutality, suspicion, or contempt,
despite being quiet, honest, and kind.
Griffin described a world where you could be threatened
or dismissed for no reason. "Nothing can describe the with-
ering horror of this. You feel lost, sick at heart before such
unmasked hatred, not so much because it threatens you as
because it shows humans in such an inhuman light. You see a
kind of insanity, something so obscene the very obscenity of it
(rather than its threat) terrifies you."6
Griffin says that his experience helped him to see that
"culture-learned behavior patterns so ingrained that they
produce involuntary reactions—is a prison." He learned to live
with constant fear?
Something akin to Griffin's experience is shared by individ-
uals who have changed their gender. Transgender scientists,
for example, report a significant and surprising change in their
colleagues attitudes toward them following their transition.
Once in the other gender's shoes, they see things they were not
able to see before.
It seems, then, that one way we can dishabituate is by tem-
porarily putting ourselves in another's skin. Doing what Griffin
did at scale is impractical, but modern technology allows us to
take tiny steps in different shoes, using virtual reality. Do you
want to know what it's like to have a different gender? A dif-
ferent skin color? Many projects nowadays allow you to take
Discrimination: The Jew, scientist, and children whc
on the perspective of someone of a different
putting on a virtual reality headset. You ca
a doctor, take the subway, or interact with a
woman rather than as a man, or as Black rath
These virtual experiences are a far cry 1
ences, of course, but they have been found to
duce implicit racial bias.? One reason may b
their effects suddenly become apparent, whic
bituation to discrimination.
These studies tell us that a visceral and
standing of another person's experience pro
ation. Most people will not have access to su
tools, and it may be impossible to know hor
be someone else, but we can gain a small win
existence through close friendships with mer
group. These can help to some extent, but
change we need to find ways to make disc
odd, unusual, and startling
DISHABITUATION ENTREPREN
If someone repeats a Jewish last name severa
ner, and then refers to someone as the "Geni
eral reaction at the table could take multiple f
an appreciative laugh, a nod of recognition, or
outrage. A laugh or a nod will not unsettle any
entrench it; an expression of outrage will dis
sion of normalcy (and have a dishabituating e200
LOOK AGAIN
A "natural" intervention that makes discrimination seem
jarring and unfamiliar, a departure from what is normal and
unremarkable, may be needed. Dishabituation entrepre-
neurs-people such as Margaret Sawyer, who are able to see
the problem and react in real time-may be required to make
the unseen seen. Sawyer is white, but she both observed the
problematic nature of the Red Cross poster and pointed it out.
Once she did that, others saw it as well and reacted. If a dis-
habituation entrepreneur had stood up at Cass's dinner party
or Talis science meeting, the incident would have been salient
and altered peoples expectations of what is acceptable.
In the history of civil rights in the United States, Rosa
Parks was one such entrepreneur. On December 1, 1955, she
famously refused to sit in the back of a bus in Montgomery,
Alabama, signaling that racial segregation was a choice, not
an inevitability, and that the choice oppressed Black people.
That signal was heard loudly, not least by white people, some
of whom became dishabituated to segregation.
Another dishabituation entrepreneur is Catharine Mac-
Kinnon. In 1978, she published Sexual Harassment of Working
Women,! which has helped to define thinking about sex dis-
crimination for decades. MacKinnor's book did three things at
once. First, it essentially invented a new term: sexual harass-
ment. The term was itself dishabituating. It named a practice
that had previously gone uncharacterized.
Second, MacKinnon argued that sexual harassment was
sex discrimination, and thus a violation of civil rights laws: a
man who sexually harassed a woman was doing so because
Discrimination: The Jew, scientist, and children w
she was a woman, and was thus engaging it
the basis of sex.
That claim was also a form of dishabiti
new in 1978, MacKinnon's central argumen
unanimous Supreme Court as early as 1986
ten by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, a fa
"When a supervisor sexually harasses a su
of the subordinates sex, that supervisor di
basis of sex." 11
Third, MacKinnon's book offered a set
women who had been subject to sexual ha
rific details in the narratives put readers in
who had been sexually harassed. After reac
ple were not likely to be able to think that
was an acceptable part of life.
The canon of dishabituation, as we migt
ily occupy a large library, including Betty !
nine Mystique'2 and Solomon Northup's Tu
What leads someone to become a dishal
neur? Why Sawyer, Parks, Griffin, and Ma
all the other people who sat on a segregat
or experienced sexual harassment? We ar
research directly addressing this questio
combination of nature and nurture generat
are less conformist, more skeptical, mor
more perceptive. We like to think that be
knowledge of behavioral science) of why
are unlikely to notice discrimination will202
LOOK AGAIN
hood that more individuals will perceive the problems around
them. Some people will also be courageous enough to try to
fix those problems.
That leads to the next question: How can those dishabitu-
ation entrepreneurs help others dishabituate?
SURPRISED BY BIAS
As we stressed earlier, the brain is a predictive machine. 14 Its
central mission is to predict, as accurately as possible, what
will happen next so that it can prepare and react in time-to
hide before the enemy arrives, hoard water before the drought,
have an umbrella handy when it pours. We generate accurate
predictions by watching and learning. We observe year after
year that in November it rains more than in June, so we carry
an umbrella during late fall rather than early summer.
We are constantly absorbing data from the world and con-
sciously or unconsciously updating our judgments to enable us
to make accurate predictions. At their best, our neurons are so-
phisticated biological calculators, keeping track of frequencies,
means, associations, and more. So if, for example, most pilots
we meet are men, we expect to see a male pilot when we get on
a plane. When those expectations are met, there is no surprise
signal in our brain alerting us that something is wrong.
From these statistical observations we then make assump-
tions about the underlying cause. If most pilots are males, our
brain will quickly conclude that men are especially suited to
flying a plane. If the "data" is biased because of historical dis-
Discrimination: The Jew, scientist, and children w
crimination, rather than reflecting some k
the capabilities of men and women, our c
biased because our brain is doing what it v
duce general rules based on perception.
Every day, we rely on such stereotype
tions when making decisions. In deciding
ployers often use proxies of many sorts, ev
are overbroad generalizations and far from
For example, test scores, employment recor
tion, and prestige of college attended are al
may think of as rational factors in employm
might choose someone who went to a gre
someone who went to a good university, ev
of people who went to good universities wor
plenty of people who went to great universit
Race and sex often operate as similar pro
be more likely than men to be the primary
dren and more likely to leave the employme
that role. If so, an employer might discrimit
he dislikes or devalues women or is prejudice
sense, but because he believes (on the basis
ble assumptions or actual experience) that so
true enough to be a basis for employment deci
such statistical discrimination can be a self-fu
It can aggravate the very problem to which it i
Matters can get even worse once you add
gence systems to the mix. Al systems are bui
human mind— they use inputs from the world
make predictions and judgments.15 If the dat204 |
LOOK AGAIN
biased, Al systems will react like human beings: the decisions
and recommendations they make will be biased.
Consider the experience of David and Jamie Heinemeier
Hansson.! In 2019 the married couple applied for an Apple
credit card. The two share all their financial resources, includ-
ing bank accounts and property. They were thus astonished
to learn that Apple offered David a much higher credit limit
than it did to his wife, Jamie- twenty times higher. After shar-
ing their story on social media, they discovered that others
had experienced the same, including Apple cofounder Steve
Wozniak and his wife.
Apple was using a biased machine-learning algorithm to
assign credit. To develop credit-card scoring, an algorithm is
fed millions of examples of good choices (for example, data on
people who have paid their debt) and bad choices (for exam-
ple, data on people who have not). It then learns which factors
predict good choices. If females are paid less than males or
find it more difficult to get a job because of gender discrim-
ination, the algorithm will conclude that males are better
candidates for credit. By discriminating against women, the
algorithm will increase the gender gap further, creating a feed-
back loop. 17
Once we detect a bias in Al systems, we can correct it by
altering the algorithm directly or intentionally modifying the
data used to create it. Although unable to tweak the algorithm
our neurons use, we can debias the inputs they receive.
More than one hundred nations now have gender quotas
designed to ensure that women are sufficiently represented in
national legislatures. Some nations have quotas for members
Discrimination: The Jew, scientist, and children w
of national minorities, and some have in
signed to ensure that traditionally disadva
represented in certain roles. Other public a
tions are making efforts to increase racial
in high-level positions and to ensure that
inent leaders include people of color and
that in some nations, including the United S
questions are raised by efforts to consider
order to increase diversity.)
One dishabituation entrepreneur, Prince
professor Yael Niv, has come up with a cre:
people to possible gender bias and nudge th
equal representation. She launched a wel
WatchNeuro (https://biaswatchneuro.com)
science conferences around the world, deta
female-to-male speakers in each conference,
the organizers. She then compares the speake
the expected ratio based on approximately ho
and males are in the field.
For example, the 3lst International Beha
ence Society Annual Meeting had 0 percent i
even though 32 percent of the scientists in the
Niv's list does not only make bias transparen
grams it. Organizers do not want their names
numbers suggestive of discrimination for all
make an effort to have adequate gender repres
In a future world, where women scientist
cians, and CEOs are as common as men, we v
see roughly the same number of females and206|
LOOK AGAIN
at a conference, sitting in the cockpit, voting in Congress, and
making decisions at the C-suite level. We will not notice gen-
der in these contexts except when it deviates from roughly an
equal ratio.
Think of it like this: if you observed the boxes below se-
quentially, by the time you get to the last box you would fully
expect to observe five black arrows facing up and one white
arrow facing down. If we recorded your brain activity when
that last box is revealed, we would not see much. When there
is nothing new, there is less signal.
111
However, if we showed you the second sequence below,
your neurons would fire wildly in response to the last box. You
expected equal numbers of black arrows facing up and white
arrows facing down, but got something completely different.
You will likely pause to contemplate why reality did not match
your expectations.
Niv is trying to reprogram our world so that in the future
when we see one white arrow and five black arrows, we will
be surprised and take note, because we will be used to the ar-
rows being roughly half black ones facing up and half white
ones facing down. She is doing this to reduce gender bias in
Discrimination: The Jew, scientist, and children who
the sciences, but her technique could be apr
from business to government and the arts.
The roots of discrimination and bias are
complex. They are spurred by history, econon
religion. But many of the roots can be traced l
rules of how our brains work-those rules ti
we see and what we miss, what we expect an
us. Once we become aware of the rules, we
what should be salient but is not, and perha
lient what should be of no importance.