ALSO BY DAN HEATH
Upstream: The Quest to Solve Problems Before They Happen
RES
How to Change What's
ALSO BY CHIP AND DAN HEATH
Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die
Switch: How to Change Things When Change Is Hard
Decisive: How to Make Better Choices in Life and Work
The Power of Moments: Why Certain Experiences
Have Extraordinary Impact
Dan He
AVID READER
New York Amsterdam/Antwerp
London76 RESET
Recommendations (find live links at danheath.com/reset-links):
For more on the theory of constraints, I'm not sure whether anything can top
the classic 1984 business book The Goal by Eliyahu Goldratt and Jeff Cox.
It offers practical examples and lessons on how to evaluate an entire system
(versus its individual components) as well as insights on organizational culture,
leadership, and teamwork. And did I mention it's a novel? Also, 24 years after
The Goal, Goldratt applied his philosophy of constraints to life more broadly
through a conversation with his daughter, Efrat, in the book The Choice. For
a practical, constraint-based approach to personal change, l'd recommend
How to Change by Katy Milkman. She described her approach: "Change
comes most readily when you understand what's standing between you and
success and tailor your solution to that roadblock." If sticky-note appreciations
struck a chord, you can hear more from Laura Heck on my podcast, What It's
Like to Be .... She gives us a peek into life as a couple's therapist-from the
power of mystery dates to the rampant misuse of the word "narcissism." And
finally, as a palate cleanser, enjoy this comedic take on what happens when
"closing the gaps" at Chick-fil-A goes too far.
5
MAP THE SYS
»> You can Find Leverage Points
above the silos to spot hiddenMAP THE SY
In 2018, two friends and colleagues, G
Goldstein, started questioning one of the
The belief went like this: If students
could successfully graduate from colleg
be their ticket to a financially secure f
stake in this belief: Brackin was a charter
Goldstein was the founder of a college p
income kids.
But both of them were starting to hav
my students enter the workforce, I just s
feeling that actually maybe the degree
get jobs that were moving them out of
wasn't the stuff of the American dream."
A Bain & Company analysis of colle
schools confirmed Brackin's intuition. O
were earning more than $40,000 per ye
holding jobs that did not require a bache80
RESET
Goldstein said, "We started realizing, we've got a problem here
because our whole theory of change is not what we had hoped."
Brackin and Goldstein began to brainstorm about possible inter-
ventions that would help these students. Their students.
Freeze there for a moment. They were looking, in short, for a
Leverage Point.
It was hard to conceive of a viable candidate, because the insti-
tutions and forces involved were so huge: families, schools, pov-
erty, employers. A particular student might spend four years in a
charter school, then four years in college, then start applying for
jobs:
EMPLOYERLI
COLLEGE
HIGH SCHOOL
"Every system is perfectly designed to get the results it gets." So
if the system depicted here was not delivering good jobs for gradu-
ating students, what could you potentially change?
Could you do something in high school? That would be an easy
place to experiment for Brackin and Goldstein, since they were in-
volved in charter high schools. But what kind of career prep, taught
to a 16-year-old, would realistically arm them for success so many
years later? ("Don't forget, six years from now, to write a really per-
sonalized cover letter ...")
What about college? Maybe, but as a charter-school administra-
tor, you have no control over college! It seems like a stretch to think
you could influence the curriculum being taught.
What about the career centers in college, though? These groups
exist for the sole purpose of helping co
jobs-a seemingly perfect spot for an inter
H
COLLEGE H
HIGH SCHOOL
CAREER CENTER
Intrigued, Brackin and Goldstein bega
reer centers operated. (Go and see the work.
not encouraging. In summarizing what th
stein and Brackin channeled the voice of
selor who had been freed to speak the l
students:
Our Career Office is not set up "to get yc
mild edits on your resume, which helps
haps 3%. We give you a handout that te
but it's not obvious how to actually do thi
Handshake online platform, which you w
ing to use. We may organize some care
wander from table to table, confused abc
Beyond that, we play dodgeball. You try
make some introductions for you, genuir
jobs, and we try to "dodge you" because
many "connections" in that way.... We ty
once or twice, then Bye.82
RESET
By carefully analyzing the experience of students through
schools and career centers, Brackin and Goldstein were mapping the
system, which is the fifth and final way to identify a Leverage Point.
Sometimes, to Find a Leverage Point, we need to zoom out and
see the big picture. Study how all the pieces fit together. Once we
understand the system as a whole, we can find the "hidden levers"—
that's a term used by Steven Hamburg of the Environmental De-
fense Fund, whom we'll meet later in the chapter.
Where were the hidden levers in a student's hunt for a good job?
Brackin and Goldstein wondered whether there was something
they could do outside school-during the job search itself:
job search!
¡EMPLOYER IL
COLLEGE
I HIGH SCHOOL
-Fat
FARGER CENTER?
They zoomed in on that part of the map because both of theni
had been inspired by the success of "high-dosage" math tutoring,
in which students received one-to-one instruction in courses where
they were struggling. The intense, personal, highly customized ap-
proach often seemed to unlock success in a way that normal school-
ing could not.
They hatched the idea of high-dosage career counseling: an inten-
sive period of coaching for young college graduates, with the goal
of yielding a job paying at least $10,000 per year more than the
graduates were currently making. They ballparked it as 30 hours of
one-to-one coaching over a three-month
higher quantity and higher quality of assist
get from any career office.
Brackin agreed to coach a few clients as
the help pro bono to lower the barrier for
Goldstein started looking for people wh
dates.
One of Brackin's first clients was Fai
Carter did administrative work for a title c
a year. Her mom had helped her get the jo
about 40 other jobs but received no callba
She was an Ivy League graduate.
Another early client, Michael Deleon,
and he was eager to find a role with more 1
pay). He had started applying for other jol
once a month. But nothing ever landed
moralizing.
It was Brackin's job to figure out why l
ing out. "The first order of business was li
you've been doing," Brackin said. "And th
to diagnose where they've gone wrong os
where they've had this misconception ab
works."
Brackin found that Faith Carter had be
level positions that required years of ex
have. He helped her calibrate. With Deleo
the key. "I used to speak a mile a minute
Deleon said. "And so something I had to
slowing down. Also being more concise ..
For both of them, Brackin's guidance v
they'd never received the feedback they no84
RESET
shooting all these shots into the air, but nothing was coming back,"
said Carter. "No' is an answer, but nevertheless it still gives me
nothing to work with. I don't know if they're declining me because
I don't have enough experience, or I'm not the right fit, or what-
ever."
With Brackin's coaching, they started applying for the right jobs
on a regular rhythm. A few months into their work, Deleon ap-
plied for a job as an assistant director of admissions at Haverford
College. "I would've never even applied for this role if it wasn't for
Geordie (Brackin]," he said. "No one's going to hire me to be an
assistant director."
To his surprise, he was invited to interview. So Brackin arranged
a series of mock interviews so Deleon could practice. When the day
came to interview with Haverford, he was ready, and he endured
the Zoom gauntlet of five successive interviews. He felt great about
how he'd done.
But he didn't get the job. It was a tough blow to absorb.
Then, six weeks later, the dean of admissions reached out to him.
The department had found the funds to create a new role specifi-
cally for him. "They connected to me through the interview pro-
cess and they didn't want to lose me," said Deleon. "They wanted
me on the team.... I was in shock."
He took the job. It paid $11,000 more than his prior role.
Meanwhile, Faith had applied for and landed a role at a private
school that paid $20,000 more.
The high-dosage career counseling was working
And it continued to work. All of Brackin's first 30 clients got a
better job within a matter of months, with a median gain of $11,000
per year. Every single one.
"I think a key to Geordie [Brackin]'s success has been that people
need somebody to untangle where they're stuck," said Goldstein.
"You find the 1 thing in 20 in a particul
them. And you can't do that with a form
constraint.)
With high-dosage career counselin
had found a viable Leverage Point-a 30
yielded meaningful results. Before their
anyone that such a service could exist or
outside the scope of high schools. It was
It was upstream of employers.
Tò find the Leverage Point, someone
the system.
The key move in mapping the system is t
the individual units or departments witl
(or across multiple organizations in the
inevitable but regrettable consequence o
to conquer holistically. You can't run m
of a garage, informally, over pizza and ber
10,000 pieces, carved up by function and
Each team gains ownership of one piece
only sane approach to managing a system
Inevitably, though, team members sta
their piece than the entire puzzle. The si
the whole. Why? Because their work is in t
in the silo. Their performance is measured
incentives are tied to the silo's results.
That's why mapping the system works I
because no one (other than the top execu
is paying attention to the whole. One tri86
RESET
transcending silos is to follow the path of a key customer or con-
stituent: For, say, a software business, you might map the journey by
which a customer discovers you, signs a contract, gets onboarded,
and subsequently seeks support. ("Journey mapping" is a common
term of art here.)
A team at the University of Iowa Hospital and Clinics (UIHC)
mapped the flow of patients through the radiology department. The
goal of the team's work was to eliminate the two-week wait time for
patients to receive CT scans. For many of the people involved, it
was the first time they'd been invited to see the big picture.
"In health care, sometimes people work in silos," said James Ba-
hensky, one of the leaders of the improvement process at the clinic.
"You've got the scanning activity, you've got X-ray activities, you've
got other things, and they all work in their own separate areas....
They don't understand each other's processes."
The team traced the patients' experience from when they ar-
rived at the clinic to when they left. When the team saw the whole,
they noticed some obvious flaws. One involved "contrast" dye, the
chalky solution that patients are asked to drink before receiving a
CT scan. (The contrast shows up white on the scans, which can
help the radiologist distinguish organs-and also spot problems.)
At UIHC, the first nurse who met with the patient supplied the
contrast. After the patient guzzled it, things would come to a halt
for an hour while the liquid made its way through the patient's GI
tract. The team wondered: Why are we waiting so long to start the clock
on the contrast? It was a costly delay.
The nurses had always been the ones to administer it, but, as
Bahensky said, "nobody seemed to know why." It was just a drink.
No real medical complexity involved
So a few days into the sprint, they bought a refrigerator for the
reception area, and now when patients checked in for a scan, the
receptionist could just hand them a bottl
ings were huge-for patient and clinic al
a new fridge.
This "buying a new fridge" type sol
idea that will not emerge within silos."
up every day and manage his or her dor
in patients efficiently and politely-but
them to say, "Hey, I should be the perso
Nor will it occur to the nurses, "Hey, t
I've been handling since time immemor
to the receptionist!" Only with the syster
to unlock an improvement like this one.
During the sprint, the working team
patients flowed through the clinic but
within the space. They observed the clin
ated "spaghetti charts," which use noodle
movements of people over time. Here's
particular tech:
Patient Prep
Cm
Scanning Rooms***..
88
RESET
As you can see, there were some long walks involved: The tech-
nologist had been escorting patients from reception to the prep
rooms. But from the systems view, it made more sense to let the
tech stay focused on CT-scanning work. Someone else could do
the chaperoning.
After the team redesigned the workflow, the technologist's new
spaghetti chart looked like this-a 91% reduction in necessary
steps. (We'll encounter more of this thinking about reducing waste
ahead in chapter 7.)
Codi
Scanning Rooms
On the strength of such improvisations and innovations, the
team successfully overhauled the clinic's operations. After the reset,
the clinic was able to see 84 patients daily, up from the previous
norm of 64. Extrapolating those results annually, Bahensky and his
colleagues wrote that "more than 3,000 additional CT cases could
be handled annually, increasing net revenue by approximately
$750,000." The two-week wait time for patients to receive a scan
was eliminated.
Folks, this took five days.
3.
The second crucial component of mappin
to spanning silos-is challenging assumpti
derstand how the different parts of a syste
start asking incisive questions: Why do w
a better way?
Mike Goldstein and Geordie Brackin as
some "high-dosage career tutoring" into th
burst of tailored assistance be enough to 1
forces at play? Or recall that in the Millio
giant leap forward was triggered when th
rector asked, Hey, what if we just trap, neute
healthy cats that are in our overcrowded shelte
"The biggest challenge you have in
is becoming aware of your assumptions
tions almost always drive how you view t
Hamburg, the chief scientist at the Envir
(EDF).
We will close this section of the book
Hamburg and his colleagues to Find a Le
the world's single most complex arena of a
down climate change. In previous chapte
people found Leverage Points in small "sys
ried couple) and in larger ones (the effort
abled veterans). Now, we'll see how the sar
a global scale.
One of Hamburg's early "assumption
involved, of all things, a van. As a professor
his job before the EDF-he'd used a natu
shuttle his forest-ecology students to field90 RESET
supposed to provide a cleaner, more efficient option than a gasoline-
powered van. But did it, really?
Natural gas had been billed as the perfect fuel to "bridge" hu-
manity as it transitioned from dirty energy (coal, oil) to clean en-
ergy (solar, wind). Natural gas burns significantly cleaner than coal
and oil. But Hamburg didn't think it was so simple. Taking the van
as an example: "We really didn't know if driving a natural-gas van
was the environmentally better thing to do," said Hamburg. "None
of the calculations included methane emissions." (Note: Methane
makes up about 97% of natural gas, so many people use the terms
interchangeably.)
Why weren't methane emissions taken more seriously? In the
world of climate change, where scientists were constantly comput-
ing the effects of different changes on the environment, researchers
had settled on the convention of computing things on a 100-year
timeline. The convention was a compromise: A century was a long
enough period to study the cumulative effects of carbon emissions
but short enough that it stayed relevant to present-day leaders.
On this 100-year timeframe, methane didn't matter, because it
was short-lived. Methane sticks around in the atmosphere only for
about a decade; CO, can last for millennia. That's why CO, was the
dominant (and often exclusive) focus of climate-change discussions,
and why you hear about "carbon footprints" but never "methane
footprints."
Hamburg realized that the assumption was problematic. Even
though methane didn't endure for 100 years, that didn't mean it was
irrelevant on a 100-year timeframe. Because during its short life, it
packed a nasty punch. Because of its unique molecular structure,
methane can trap up to 80 times more heat than other greenhouse
gases, so even a small increase could have an outsized impact on
how much the planet warms, and how quickly.
So, in a way, the natural-gas van bec
the folly of the timeframe assumption. B
some basic math, he came to a startling c
year timeframe, driving a natural gas-p
the environment. But it was a net negati
years! It turned positive only during the la
So the van was bad for him. It was bar
was bad for his children's children. But
grandchildren could eke out some small
Hamburg came to realize that the wo
crises-the carbon-dioxide problem (th
cussion) and now a methane-emissions 1
overlook either one. "We need to solve
"It's not an or—it's an and." In mapping
discovered something unexpected and v
lever: reducing methane emissions-and
matically."
There are natural sources of methar
lands. Those would be hard to contain. ]
sions were preventable, such as leaks fror
natural gas, as well as from the pipes u:
duce methane emissions, those leaks wor
plugged. That was no easy mission, thou
less and colorless. (It's true that you can
nace or stove, but that's only because
reasons-have added a chemical that sm
With infrared cameras, though, leaks
leak was identified, fixing it wasn't rocke
*To get real for a moment, though, your grec
not going to see a "benefit" to driving your har92 RESET
Better yet, for the energy companies involved, the leaks represented
lost revenue—if natural gas escapes into the atmosphere, you can't
sell it-which gave them a financial incentive (as well as a moral
one) to take leaks seriously.
This financial incentive illustrates, once again, the importance
of finding Leverage Points that are both worth doing and doable. It
would be immensely valuable to our great-grandchildren's future if
all current citizens would switch immediately to a vegan diet. That
is worth doing from a climate-change perspective. But it's also very,
very far from doable.
By contrast, reducing methane was both environmentally sig-
nificant and of value to the exact industry doing the polluting.
At EDE, Hamburg and his colleagues-along with researchers
from universities and the energy industry-expanded the hunt for
leaks. What they learned, in some cases, was outright alarming: In
the Permian Basin in West Texas, for example-the second-largest
natural-gas area in the United States-methane was leaking at a
rate 60% higher than the EPA's estimates. At that level of leaking,
natural gas was worse for the planet than coal!
But Hamburg and his colleagues found bright spots, too. Early
on, researchers scanned and inspected the Barnett natural-gas field
in central Texas. One-third of the sites had either minuscule meth-
ane leaks or none at all. A buttoned-up system was possible, after all.
(Study the bright spots.)
Even as the leak-chasers learned more and more about the sys-
tem, their sense of dissatisfaction grew. "The studies give us snap-
shots but they don't give us the comprehensive view," Hamburg
said. "They don't give us the movie. We've never had the data to
answer three basic questions: Where are the emissions? How much
are the emissions? And how are they changing over time?"
But answering these questions on a global level seemed a
far-fetched aspiration: Only an innovat
could hope to provide that level of det:
Then, the EDF team proceeded to
of science fiction: They hatched a plan to
satellite into space. From orbit, using
lite could compile a real-time portrait
planet.
On March 4, 2024, that satellite—N
aboard a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket. It will
Points: Where are the biggest leaks? I
them? Who has an incentive to do the
mental dream.
The goal is to cut 45% of methane e
which is the carbon-footprint equivale
of all coal plants in the world. The sat
lion. But if it can help to minimize the
storms, fires, floods, and droughts, it will
age Point for the ages.94
RESET
Whirlwind review: Chapter 5, Map the System
1. The fifth and final way to identify Leverage Points is to map the system-
zoom out to see the big picture. You're hunting for the "hidden levers" in
the system.
a. In trying to help low-income college graduates get better jobs, Mike
Goldstein and Geordie Brackin saw that one promising place to in-
tervene was during the job search itself (as opposed to during formal
education).
b. Their idea for "high-dosage career counseling" proved incredibly ef-
fective for all of their early clients.
2. Mapping the system requires ascending above the silos both within and
across organizations.
3. One reliable tool for mapping the system is to follow the journey of a cus-
tomer (or palient or student) as they intersect different silos.
a. By following the patient journey through the radiology clinic, the clinic's
staffers were able to spot valuable Leverage Points, such as having the
receptionist administer contrast upon check-in.
4. The second critical aspect of mapping the system, in addition to rising
above silos, is the need to challenge assumptions.
a. According to EDF's Steven Hamburg, the assumptions always drive
how you view the system.
b. There was a key assumption that had deterred environmental leaders
from focusing on methane: Because of its uniquely short life, it really
didn't matter in the long run.
c. By rethinking these assumptions, Hamburg and the EDF uncovered a
"hidden lever" in the world of climate change: the opportunity to re-
duce methane emissions quickly.
5. By studying the way systems function-and the relationships between
their parts-you can Find Leverage Points that unlock progress, even on
a global scale.
Recommendations (find live links at dant
For more on Geordie Brackin and Mike Goldstei
of career centers-and potential Leverage Point
out their white paper, Peeling The "College Car
For a detailed, day-by-day account of how the
radiology department fixed patient wait limes wi
fascinating case study. For the director's-cut versic
David W. Brown's New Yorker story "A Security (
be sure to watch Fred Krupp's inspiring TED Talk c
project and its vast potential-around the 3:00 r
cameras can detect leaks that are otherwise inv
gies for "mapping the system" that I felt were be
ter, but I still think they are really valuable: (1) J
briefly) is a good way to "map the system" for c
eic. For a primer on customer journey mapping,
101. (2) Developing a "theory of change": This
for Innovation coaches nonprofits through creal
their efforts to change the world. It's about as c
hope for-complete with videos, exercises, and a
diagram": This is a really helpful visual tool for i
system that "drive" a certain outcome. More on t