ALSO BY DAN HEATH
Upstream: The Quest to Solve Problems Before They Happen
RES
How to Change What's l
ALSO BY CHIP AND DAN HEATH
Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die
Switch: How to Change Things When Change Is Hard
Decisive: How to Make Better Choices in Life and Work
The Power of Moments: Why Certain Experiences
Have Extraordinary Impact
Dan He
AVID READER I
New York
Amsterdam/ Antwerp
London58
RESET
Recommendations (find live links at danheath.com/reset-links):
I learned about the US Air Force's cockpit study from Todd Rose's fascinating
book The End of Average. Rose, who headed the Mind, Brain, and Educa-
tion program at Harvard, breaks down the myth of measuring individuals
against the average in schools and at work. He's really good at showing how
there are usually multiple pathways to success: the three approaches children
take when learning to read, the seven distinct routes to career success, and
others. For a more psychological take on change, including a closer look
at the power of bright-spots thinking, check out Switch, by my brother Chip
and me. For even more on bright spots-especially for social-sector work—
see The Power of Positive Deviance by Richard Pascale, Jerry Sternin, and
Monique Sternin. ("Positive deviance" = bright-spots thinking.) If you're a
cal person-or simply interested in learning more about how a pair of vets
managed to save millions of cats-check out the Unleashing Social Change
podcast episode with Kate Hurley as a guest. For a master class on how
Hurley approached fixes for overcrowding in shelters, watch her virtual lec-
ture hosted by the San Diego Humane Society. Or, to learn more about the
five lifesaving strategies used in the Million Cat Challenge, check out the
resources section of the campaign's website. (As a teaser, one strategy was
"managed admission," which was basically a way of relieving bottlenecks,
a topic we will explore in the next chapter.)
4
TARGET THE CONS
/.
L
>> You can Find Leverage Points
the #1 force that is holding yTARGET THE CON
One night during the pandemic, I was sen
dinner for the family. What I saw when I
seemingly endless line of cars for the driv
cally through the parking lot and twisting
I panicked. I hate lines. This was a half-
I started fabricating wife-worthy excuse
honey, there was a road closed. So naturally I
rest of the way, but it turns out they'd run o
pizca?
Then I rallied myself. No, come on, buck
the 50ish cars ahead of me. Be a good dad.
After one final moment of desperate m
if I just offered my daughters extra screen tim
cepted my fate.
I rolled forward and entered the line.
Later I found that my experience was
data. QSR magazine published in 2023 a s62
RESET
took, on average, for customers to get through a drive-thru line at
10 major franchises. Check out where Chick-fil-A landed:
CHAINI
Taco Bell
Carl's Jr.
KFC
Arby's
Dunkin'
Hardee's
Wendy's
Burger King
McDonald's
Chick-fil-A
TOTAL SECONDS REQUIRED TO
GET THROUGHTHE PRIVE THRU
279
304
304
320
321
336
343
351
413
436
Dead last! You'd get through the line at Taco Bell about 2.5 min-
utes faster.
But let's get back to my predicament. Once I joined the line,
something happened that tragically interrupted my sulking: I no-
ticed that the line was moving. Almost constantly. It crept forward,
steadily, like an automatic car wash.
I flipped from irritated to fascinated. This was the most opera-
tionally sophisticated drive-thru I'd ever seen. It ran like clockwork.
(Cluckwork?)* By the time I emerged from the line, nuggets in the
passenger seat, I promised myself I'd investigate the story.
It had taken less than 10 minutes to get 50 cars through the
line.
This aspect of my experience, too, was reflected in a chart
*If you're viewing this as an ebook, there's an in-app purchase that allows
you to remove all of these puns.
TARC
published by QSR. The previous chart show
get through the line. This one shows the aver
line. Note the Chick-fil-A number relative t
CHAIN
Chick-fil-A
McDonald's
Wendy's
Taco Bell
Burger King
Dunkin'
KFC
Arby's
Hardee's
Carl's Jr.
AVG A
So the data is saying, yes, it's taking a wi
line at Chick-fil-A, but that's because there
line. The chain's speed, in terms of cars serv
the best in the country.
And, as it turns out, my local Chick-fi
Durham, North Carolina) is one of the top f
drive-thrus in the entire chain. At its best,
in an hour. That's a car every nine second
through college before Hardee's would finis
My local nugget source is basically the U:
But it wasn't always that way. In the be
mal Chick-fil-A with a normal drive-thru.
of critical changes over the years, one after
present-day results.
Those changes were guided by a simple:
use to boost your own change efforts. It's t64
RESET
constraint, and it's the fourth of five methods you can use to identify
Leverage Points.
What's the "constraint"? It's the limiting factor. It's the #1 force
that is holding you back from doing your work better or on a greater
scale. (I'm using "constraint" as a synonym for "bottleneck" — the
two terms are similar, but I like the former because it seems broader
and lacks the factory/operations connotations of "bottleneck.")*
And in your search for Leverage Points, you are looking for can-
didates that target the constraint-that erode the obstacles standing
in the way.
Chick-fil-A's steady progress over the years was fueled by con-
tinuous attention to constraints. "Drive-thru is all about flow," said
Tony Fernandez, the owner/operator of the Chick-fil-A at Roxboro
Road. "It's about managing the bottlenecks."
A key early Leverage Point was the embrace of "face-to-face or-
dering." Meaning that in the drive-thru lanes outside the restaurant,
a human being stands next to your car and takes your order. It was a
triple win: First, it's faster. The traditional menu board dazzles and
delays customers. But with somebody standing at your window, you
make quicker decisions.
Second, pushing the order takers upstream into the parking lot
increased the amount of time the kitchen had to produce the meals,
thus increasing the odds your food would be ready right when your
car arrived at the window.t
*For readers intrigued by the notion of constraints, there's a classic business
book you should immediately order called The Goal by Eliyahu Goldratt and
Jeff Cox. It explains the "Theory of Constraints" via a fictionalized account of
a failing factory and a failing marriage. It's an odd and compelling book and
there's a reason it has sold more than 10 million copies.
†Weirdly, in drive-thru lingo, they call the window (where you get your food)
the "door." I refuse to be complicit in this usage.
TAR
Third, and perhaps most important, unt
from the menu board allowed Chick-fil-A
food franchise might be stuck with one me
if it's busy). But there's no natural limit on
In 2024, my Chick-fil-A would routinely I
taking orders simultaneously.
In the early days, before tablet compt
place, the parking-lot attendants would call
via cell phones. Then, the constraint shifte
cess, so they wheeled out the cash register to
superlong cable. As technology advanced, e
ers could accept payment, too. Wireless tab
Periodically, the bottleneck would shi
(who make the food) or to "meal assembly'
and bag your order). More staffers would
relieve the constraint.
One day, one of Fernandez's lieutenants
cob's brother Austin), flew a drone above th
line. (Go and see the work.) Watching the vide
that when the line spilled out onto the stre
don it. I could relate.
That insight sparked an idea for anothe
"closing the gaps," which meant that whil
taken, you were encouraged to keep your
with the order taker walking alongside you
gets and sauces. That forward movement le
between cars, which accommodated more
reduced the chance that the line would ov
which prevented potential customers from I
Closing the gaps had a psychological pay
operational one. Fernandez and his team l66
RESET
customer satisfaction was not necessarily minimizing the wait time.
It was the feeling of progress. That steadily creeping 50-car line
at Chick-fil-A, which takes seven minutes to complete, is actually
preferable to idling in the five-minute line behind two cars at Tàco
Bell. It's less painful. (Uncanny, isn't it, how this mirrors the prog-
ress principle from the introduction? The feeling of progress is psy-
chologically precious.)
Keep in mind that, even as you improve your operations, the
constraint never goes away. As one area gets better, the constraint
shifts elsewhere. When I first met Fernandez, the active constraint
in the system was the "beverage cockpit." The laws of physics would
simply not allow the team to pour the drinks into the cups quickly
enough to keep up with the line. They needed more drink dispens-
ers, but there wasn't room, so they had to wait for an expensive
renovation that more than doubled the capacity of the beverage
cockpit.
By mid-2024, the constraint was back to meal assembly. They're
working on it. The new goal was an unprecedented 500-car hour.
Fernandez joked that, someday, he'll hire quarterbacks to work
the drive-thru window, so cars can just roll by without stopping,
their food thrown through the window in a perfect spiral.
2.
What's counterintuitive about constraints is that even smart-seeming
investments can be worthless at improving the operations of a system
if they don't address the constraint.
Here's a simple example. Let's say you're running a donut stand
at a county fair. One person cooks the donuts, which takes 60 sec-
onds, and the other person takes the orders, which takes 90 seconds.
The stand is busy all day, with a long line of customers waiting.
TARI
Imagine that a salesman approaches you
cial donut fryer that will cut your cook tim
onds to 30 seconds. It's expensive, but that?
The fryer is a solid Leverage Point— you sh
No. Because if you think of the overall s
on a rhythm of 90 seconds per customer: Eve
customer walks away with donuts. And the
performance— the bottleneck— is the orderi
So if you could cook donuts in 30 seco
system as a whole wouldn't get any faster!
wouldn't serve any more customers. Your c
minute of idle time in between every custo
fancy fryer is not a Leverage Point because it
operations.
To fight the constraint, you should hire
With two order takers going, you'll be check
on average every 45 seconds, which means ti
flips to the donut-cooking (which takes 60).
So NOW it's time to call the donut-fryer:
lets you cook donuts every 30 seconds, which
flips back to ordering. If you hire a third orde
taking orders at 90 seconds apiece means a
seconds-then, presto, you've got a lightning-
monized at 30 seconds per order. You've tripl
You could theoretically keep running thi
whittling the time down, down, down. But
out of customers. You'll have a small army of
around, checking their phones. The constrain
*Have I created this whole thought experiment abor
to Krispy Kreme will be tax-deductible? Perhaps. Mig68
RESETI
So, in the world of operations, the notion of a constraint is rigid.
Mathematical. In other contexts, the constraint may be less scien-
tific. But it's still relevant.
Let's zoom far away from fast food. Away from scale, away from
speed. Let's consider the home-care business, in which customers
hire caregivers to attend to their (in most cases) very old relatives.
The caregivers are not trained medical personnel; rather, they help
with the daily activities of life: bathing, shopping, cleaning, cook-
ing. They also provide companionship. Often, the people they care
for live alone.
So this is a business that's personal, complicated, human, com-
passionate, messy, difficult. The antifactory. But it still has a con-
straint! In the post-pandemic era, the constraint on the growth of
most home-care businesses was labor: finding and keeping good
people.
It's hard to attract good people when the job demands intense,
taxing work but the pay is close to minimum wage. Home-care
leaders could pay their staffers a generous wage-say, $30 an hour!
But then most of their business would evaporate, because their cus-
tomers are regular folks paying out of pocket for their own relatives
to receive care. For most non-rich people, it's a massive financial
burden. There's just not much room to budge on wages.
So how do you hire extremely capable and dependable people
for a subpar wage? Mostly, you don't. Workers cycle in and out of
home care constantly. The median turnover rate in the industry is
about 65%, meaning that two out of every three workers are gone
within a year. Churn rates above 100% are not uncommon.
So that's your constraint. You can't grow because it's really hard
to find more staffers who will work (reliably) at the wages you can
afford to pay.
Laura Shaw-deBruin, the executive director of Norwood Seniors
TARC
Network, decided to aim her efforts squarely
was appalled by the high-churn norms of th
barrassing. It was not efficient," she said. "I
where they worked. I wanted them to be hap
To escape the endless churn cycle, she n
Norwood got pickier about whom it hired,
keep those chosen few. That required a subsi
ment-building a pipeline of candidates an
filters to identify the absolute best employee:
questionnaires, structured interviews, backgr
orous preorientation process- involves a me
The interview, for instance, is designed to
had the wrong instincts for home-care wo
people will say," said Shaw-deBruin. One sce
times is, Imagine that you're working with a
dementia and she's getting angry at you and yell
Some candidates, Shaw-deBruin said, will
out the door: "When you're caring for somebc
out the door," she said. Some candidates hav
interviews while driving their car. One perso
ing a bath. (These people were not hired.)
The preorientation process, too, is bur
physical and a drug test, among other steps.
delivered on a strict deadline. "If they're late
don't even bother hiring them," said Shaw-
get the things done on time, are they not g
shift? We value reliability."
Only 3% or so of Norwood's applicants
cream of the crop and are often caregivers
Norwood wants to keep them.
The firm tries to carefully match careg70
RESET
the caregiver has a veto if the fit doesn't seem right. The match
is critical, since the relationships can last for years. "We have a
client right now who smokes weed and drinks all day," said Shaw-
deBruin. "That's all he does. He's retired and this is how he wants
to spend his retirement. He is not aggressive. He's not hurtful or
nasty. He just doesn't give a hoot about anything. But without us
there, he won't eat or shower. So we help him, remind him to do
those things. And we take him places because he does not get in
the car anymore, thank goodness. One of the caregivers I have with
him is just as old as he is ….. very laid-back. And they work perfectly
together."
Norwood built a mentoring program that matches new hires
with more experienced staffers. Home care can be "very isolating"
for new workers, said Shaw-deBruin. "I wanted them to feel con-
nected." Now, they're contacted by a peer on their first day. And
then again on the 30-, 60-, and 90-day milestones. The program
gives them someone to talk to-someone who's not a boss. Some-
one who can relate to the countless daily hardships of caregiving.
At Chick-fil-A, the constraint bobbed around-from ordering
to payment to baggers to beverages and so on. As the constraint
shifted, so did the Leverage Point-the part of the system where
applying force could permit disproportionate progress.
At Norwood, by contrast, the constraint holds rock steady, and
so does its strategy. The constraint is labor quality and retention—
all day, every day. So the firm's leaders have identified Leverage
Points to relieve that constraint: a tough hiring process and a men-
torship program and careful attention to matching the right care-
giver with the right client.
All this attention to retention has paid off: Caregivers stay with
them. Norwood is now consistently below 30% churn, which is
rare in the industry. And it's no mystery why the firm has had that
TAR
success: It thoughtfully and consistently applie
constraint.
Constraints are contingent on a goal. If y
the constraint at my kid's school?" that qu
Constraint on what? The constraint on sma
lack of teachers. Or classroom space. The
the student experience might be the lack of int
rooms (reminiscent of the "shadow a studes
Chick-fil-A found its constraint in the
flow of its drive-thru. Norwood found its a
of growing the business. How do you find the
you've identified?
Often the "go and see the work" advice
the trick. When you observe how the work 1
spot blockages. Where are there pileups or
Or try asking yourself this question: If y
one person to help you achieve your goal, y
role be? The role you identify might well
constraint. Once you realize this, you migh
constraint even if you can't actually hire so
Even individuals have constraints. The
Heck deals constantly with unhappy fight
job to identify what's holding them back a
verse the bad feelings. What's something
them to embrace immediately-but also
What could possibly serve as a Leverage
riage?
Heck frequently recommends to her72
RESET
"sticky-note appreciations." Here's how it works: You keep a sticky-
note pad and a pen right by the toothbrush holder in the bathroom.
Then, while you brush your teeth, you're thinking about something
positive you noticed about your partner: Something you appreci-
ated. You write it on a sticky note and leave it on the mirror for
them to find: "Thanks for making time to talk college stuff with
Lucas-—you're so good with him."
"I'm hoping to create an attitude of gratitude in their relation-
ship where they're creating this desire to look for the positives,"
said Heck. "What's going right in the relationship? What do you
love and appreciate about your partner? Because whatever we look
for, we're going to find."
This activity is a reliable client favorite. And it's easy to under-
stand why: People love finding those notes of appreciation twice
a day.
Except that Heck said that those little bursts of joy are not really
the point. "It might feel really good to receive a sticky note from
your partner, but that's not actually the purpose of this," she said.
"The purpose is to create a habit of mind where you're scanning for
the positives. And it gets easier with time. So the more you start to
tune into What do I appreciate? What do I admire? What do I respect?,
the easier it becomes."
This is ingenious. As a therapist, almost everything is out of your
control: the couple's past, their personalities, their emotions, their
jobs and finances and kids. Not to mention that you might see them
for only one hour in a week. The other 167 hours are out of your
jurisdiction.
To repeat a riff from the introduction: When you're facing a
big challenge, you can't change everything. You can't change most
things. You can't even change a respectable fraction of things! But,
with a bit of prodding and catalyzing, you can help change something.
For Heck, that something was to "cre
you're scanning for the positives." That
key constraint in the couple's lives: the
positive about their partners. They're
glasses, they're wearing jackass-colored g
The sticky-note appreciations activi
doesn't instantly solve a couple's probles
verage Point. For struggling couples who
hopes that it's possible to get back to wi
chance to see the boulder budge.
Because constraints make sense only it
logical corollary is that when you shift
shifts too.
Think about the veterans loan-forgive
ter 2. In the beginning, when veterans ha
the constraint was "reducing the friction
came the epiphany: Hey, let's just proactive.
That's a new goal. And as a result the c
thing more like: getting permission from di
to compare databases so that we can figure or
given. Targeting that constraint, rather the
a huge difference in how you direct your
Similarly, with the Million Cat Challe
"return to field" practice amounted to a
ters. If your goal is to shelter cats in hopes
and you're hopelessly overcrowded, your
lack of space. Or the lack of families rec
committing to return to field, though, the74 RESET
something more like: making sure there is enough surgical capacity
to handle all the spaying and neutering that's necessary.
When you know where you're headed and understand what's
keeping you from getting there, you can overcome that constraint
and chart a better path forward.
TARC
Whirlwind review: Chapter 4, Target the Cc
1. The fourth way to identify Leverage Points is to
bottleneck-the #1 thing holding you back from
fied the constraint, you can spot ideas for easing
a. At the Chick-fil-A on Roxboro Road, the dri
every nine seconds! They achieved that level
ing the bottlenecks systematically.
2. Constraints don't go away. When you relieve or
the system AND another constraint takes its pla
straint.
3. Investments that aren't directed at the constrain
prove the system as a whole.
a. In the donut shop example, buying a new
donuts faster, but that wouldn't help anything
the beginning) was the ordering step.
4. Constraints can be clear-cut in operations-intensi
organization faces constraints, even if they aren't
a. In Norwood's home-care business, the co.
worthy labor who would work for the wage
To relieve that constraint, the firm hired more
retention and employee satisfaction.
b. Even individuals have constraints. In Laurc
practice, the key constraint was "viewing yc
she prescribed the sticky-note appreciations
5. Constraints only make sense in the context of g
the constraint will move, too.
a. In the Million Cat Challenge, shelters began
"return to field." That, in turn, shifted the cons
surgical capacity for spaying and neutering.
6. When you understand deeply what is holding yc
sible Leverage Points that will allow you to shrir
forward progress.76
RESET
Recommendations (find live links at danheath.com/reset-links):
For more on the theory of constraints, l'm not sure whether anything can top
the classic 1984 business book The Goal by Eliyahu Goldratt and Jeff Cox.
It offers practical examples and lessons on how to evaluate an entire system
(versus its individual components) as well as insights on organizational culture,
leadership, and teamwork. And did I mention it's a novel? Also, 24 years after
The Goal, Goldratt applied his philosophy of constraints to life more broadly
through a conversation with his daughter, Efrat, in the book The Choice. For
a practical, constraint-based approach to personal change, I'd recommend
How to Change by Katy Milkman. She described her approach: "Change
comes most readily when you understand what's standing between you and
success and tailor your solution to that roadblock." If sticky-note appreciations
struck a chord, you can hear more from Laura Heck on my podcast, What It's
Like to Be ... She gives us a peek into life as a couple's therapist-from the
power of mystery dates to the rampant misuse of the word "narcissism." And
finally, as a palate cleanser, enjoy this comedic take on what happens when
"closing the gaps" at Chick-fil-A goes too far.
5
MAP THE SYS
/
> You can Find Leverage Poin
above the silos to spot hidde