ALSO BY DAN HEATH
Upstream: The Quest to Solve Problems Before They Happen
RES
How to Change What's
ALSO BY CHIP AND DAN HEATH
Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die
Switch: How to Change Things When Change Is Hard
Decisive: How to Make Better Choices in Life and Work
The Power of Moments: Why Certain Experiences
Have Extraordinary Impact
Dan He
AVID READER
New York
Amsterdam/Antwerp London20
RESET
Recommendations (find live links at danheath.com/reset-links):
(Note from Dan Heath: Here's a quick explanation of these "Recommenda-
tions" sections that follow each chapter. These are not sources per se-the
endnotes are at the back of the book. Rather, the Recommendations offer
tips about places to explore beyond the book. Sometimes the links give extra
color to the points made in the text; sometimes they're the original sources
cited, when I think those sources are worth a deeper dive; sometimes they're
interesting tangents. The "links" are underlined below but please know that I
am not an insane person who thinks you can poke your finger at them to visit
a website. The idea here is that you should visit the website danheath.com/
reset-links and there you'll find this exact paragraph below, except that the
links will be clickable. Happy hunting!)
In this talk, which I highly recommend, the engineer and innovator Tom Chi
describes how he fights against guess-a-thons and gets his teams working in
the medium of reality. To see what it's like for a principal to step into the real-
ity of a student, watch the PBS NewsHour segment I mention in the chapter.
You'll see Assistant Principal Karen Ritter run sprints, battle back-to-back sec-
tions of Algebra, and write an essay alongside her ninth-grade shadowee,
Alan Garcia. If you'd like to take a deeper look at the illusion of explanatory
depth research, head here for the academic article. (And to see that video
of teenagers struggling to explain toilets, go here.) If you're curious about
the swashbuckling world of turnaround specialists, start with James Shein's
Reversing the Slide. Shein's book is both sharp and irreverent, making for an
engaging read. Or, take a listen to my conversation with the turnaround con-
sultant Jeff Vogelsang, whom I interviewed on my podcast, What li's like to
Be ... He's the guy quoted in this chapter saying that when you interview
frontline people, they'll "puke out" everything that was relevant. For more on
"going to the gemba" — the inspiration for MIT professor Nelson Repenning's
"go and see the work" advice-check out The Toyota Way. I's a great sum-
mary of the Toyota Production System-much beloved by operations gurus. In
this article and this talk, Repenning details how you can increase the visibility
of the work you and your team are doing. This is especially important for
knowledge work, Repenning points out, where feedback is naturally far less
visible than in manufacturing.
2
CONSIDER THE
OF THE GO
>> You can Find Leverage Points
alternate pathways to your ultimCONSIDER THE
OF THE GO
On July 15, 2022, Ryan Davidsen bought
Ram 1500. To celebrate, he planned to take
next weekend.
Then, a few days after he drove it off th
down began.
The dealership texted him on July 20 a
O to 10 on the "overall buying experience.'
On July 21, Brittany—a customer care :
asking, "Is there anything that we could t
next day, a Friday, she sent another email,
we have made your experience more pleasa
undeterred by his nonresponse, she sent a
just one thing that we would like to know. H
ing experience have been better?"
That same Monday, another person fron24
RESETI
texted him to see whether he needed anything. And his salesperson
texted, too:
Hi Ryan how you doing, how's
the truck?
levastating. Gott fred ti
Ohnoo l'm sorry abatit that
So you received the survey the
other day to your emaili can yau.
fil bout for me please it's really
important to me. if you need help
with itlet me know
(You get the sense that if a loved one died, the salesperson would
send flowers and a survey.)
On Wednesday, the dealership texted him again, stating "our
team would really appreciate your positive responses."
Davidsen could sympathize with the dealership's desire for feed-
back, because at the time he was in charge of customer experience
for a health care software firm. He, too, had to keep tabs on cus-
tomer satisfaction. He could relate.
So, he took the time to fill out the survey. Gave some high scores,
some low, reflecting his experience. He left thoughtful comments
so the dealership could understand his ratings. He also replied to
Brittany, who'd been desperate for that "one thing" that would have
improved his experience.
He wrote, "I liked the people I worked with-my salesperson
and my finance specialist. They were easy to work with and made it
CONSIDER TH
an enjoyable experience." Then he elaborat
gone better:
Things I didn't like was the experience of
ditional items that get added to the final
I then have to negotiate out or negotiate
back-and-forth as everyone had to chec
while I wait. I hated that.
Still, he concluded on a positive note: "
and intend to stick with this dealership f
asking."
He never heard from Brittany again.
Within hours of submitting his survey,
him again: "Hey Ryan did I do anything wr
Davidsen wrote back, "Not at all-had noth
say about you. I hope they let you read it." I
"I understand that but every single score m
Since then, Davidsen said, the dealershi
on the bed cover he bought with his truck."
don't have a bed cover and every text and
unanswered, which leaves me feeling it is 'p
helpful survey I sent," he said.
2.
Let's lift our view of Davidsen's horror sto
Because this is a story of change gone wron,
The leaders at Stellantis (the multinatic
Chrysler, Jeep, and Ram) were surely not26
RESET
stories like this one. No doubt their original intent was pretty re-
spectable: We want to create a great car-buying experience for our cus-
tomers! That mission is big, long-term, and somewhat diffuse. What
kind of shorter-term goal might serve that long-term mission?
Boosting customer-satisfaction scores.
And my guess is that the team at the dealership where Davidsen
bought his truck did, in fact, make progress toward that short-term
goal. Probably their customer-satisfaction scores were outstanding!
But their success was due not to their passion for improving the
customer experience but rather to their prowess at browbeating
customers into providing falsely inflated scores. That's a sad kind
of excellence.*
If you were a senior brand leader at Ram, you'd surely want to
sniff out this discrepancy. How could you do it? By going and secing
the work. The problems that Ryan Davidsen experienced were not
subtle at all. (I mean, his salesperson responded to his text about
having his brand-new truck's windows bashed in by saying, Aw man,
bunmes, but anyhoo, about that survey ... ) But to spot problems—
even obvious ones— you do have to look.
All it would have taken, to surface silly antics like the dealer-
ship's, was a single in-person visit perhaps by someone posing as
* And for even sadder excellence: When Davidsen was still in the process of
buying his truck, the sales rep brought over a FRAMED version of the survey
that Davidsen would eventually be asked to fill out. The sales rep walked him
through every question on it and told him what the "right" answer to each
question should be! On the question "How would you rate your sales con-
sultant overall?" he instructed Davidsen to give him a 10 out of 10. (The sales
rep also thoughtfully gave Davidsen a laminated take-home copy of the sur-
vey, with right answers filled in, for further study and reflection.) All of these
maneuvers provide a killer illustration of Goodhart's Law: "When a measure
becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure."
CONSIDER TH
a potential customer. That visit would have
ership's actual behavior was making a moc
that point, surely the leaders would have rea
numbers, but they're the wrong numbers.
You should embrace the same discipline
forts: Before you strain yourself to budge a
ing: Are you targeting the right boulder?
You don't want to fall into the dealersh
chasing a goal and triumphantly making 1
sures, only to discover (whoops) that it was
One simple way to avoid that misalignment-
tent with the real mission- is to ask a simple
What's the goal of the goal?
The British advertising guru Rory Suth
ample of this idea in action. In 2007, Eurost
ing the rail route from London to Paris, :
from 2 hours 35 minutes to 2 hours 15 mint
was roughly $6 billion, and the goal of the
speed up the route. Mission accomplished.
the goal?
If the goal, ultimately, was to make thing
gers, was that investment well spent? Suthe
0.01% of this money, you could have put Wi
wouldn't have reduced the duration of the j
improved its enjoyment and its usefulness
2011 speech. "For maybe 10% of the mon
all of the world's top male and female supe
down the train handing out free Château
sengers. You'd still have five billion pound:
would ask for the trains to be slowed down.
We can get so fixated on a goal that we28
RESET
And when we lock into a particular goal too quickly, we blind our-
selves to alternate routes forward that might have been better and
easier.
In early 2023, I studied a group of people as they set New Year's
resolutions and began to work toward them. Marisa Lavars, an Aus-
tralian mother of two, had initially declared this as her goal: "I'd
like to get fit, or fitter: To be able to go about my daily activities
without being breathless and to lose a bit of weight so I can fit into
my pre-COVID clothes."
Lavars had significant health challenges. She was struggling with
heart problems triggered by COVID, and as if that weren't enough,
she had recently been diagnosed with breast cancer. Her reference
to being "breathless" was no exaggeration: Everyday activities like
showering could exhaust her. Her heart rate sometimes spiked to
180 even when she was lying down.
After Lavars submitted her resolution to get fitter, the survey
prompted her to consider why that goal was important to her. (In
other words, what was the goal of her goal?) Here's what Lavars
wrote: "Absolutely my kids. I want to be the best Mum I can be for
them and part of that is being healthy, but it also means modeling
for them living my best life."
Then, the survey asked her: What are 10 different ways you
could achieve or approach that aspiration, other than by following
your initial resolution? Suddenly, her answers changed dramati-
cally. Here is what she wrote about her alternate pathways:
→ "Things have been pretty serious for us this past year. I could find
some ways to bring back some fun into our lives as fun at times has
been in short supply."
→ "We used to have some pretty locked-in routines in the evening,
where things stopped and we did some reading, writing, and
CONSIDER THE
maths and then I would read to them. This ho
back or hasn't occurred at all. This would be i
doin
→ "I would like to bring back music into our live
Lavars realized, immediately, that these
closer to "success" than the fitness-oriented g
sense of light-heartedness through going thro
wrote. "It feels more connected to the why."
Within a few months, she had dreamed up
she could create moments with her twin sev
spite her poor health. She'd bought some rock
randa. They would sit outside and rock and w
play. She bought the Harry Potter 6,000-piec
been opening one bag of the kit each week.
She had also started a tradition of playing
her worst-lying on the couch with an ice pac
heart rate down-she could still participate. S
gonna roll the dice?" She'd tease, "Did you cl
"Even if I'm vomiting, I'll still be playi
game." She laughed. "It just feels really doable
kids too-they're just so much more settled b
mum is still mum."
She looks back with amusement on her i
had been thinking, "I have to get fit, because
time with the kids... I look back now and g
actually done that, or I would have felt bad ab
By reconsidering her first goal-and conte
"goal of the goal" —she was able to ensure
made amounted to something meaningful for her30
RESET
3.
Another tool for exploring the "goal of the goal" is a technique that
comes from the discipline of solutions-focused therapy. It's called
the "Miracle Question." The therapist says the following:
Imagine that in the middle of the night tonight, as you are
sleeping, a miracle happens ... the problem you are stressed
about has been solved. Poof! Gone. But the miracle happened
when you were sleeping, so when you first wake up, you have
no way of knowing it happened.
What are the first things you notice, as you start your day,
that reveal to you that the miracle happened?
A therapist named Linda Metcalf asked the Miracle Question to
a couple, Elaine and Felix, whose marriage was on the rocks. Here
were their answers:
ELAINE: When we were first married, we were best friends. In
our miracle we would be best friends again. We would be
doing things we did then-dancing, hiking, talking, talking,
and more talking.
FELIX: The kids would be better behaved and we would share
the responsibility for the kids more equally. Sometimes I
think I have to do everything. In the miracle, she wouldn't
get on the phone with her sisters at night and we would
help the kids with their schoolwork together.
ELAINE: We wouldn't be so resentful and distrusting. Instead
we would sit down and plan together for a change, like we
used to.
FELIx: I think she's wonderful and I want her to want me
CONSIDER THE
again. In the miracle, she would look up
when I came home and be glad to see me
Think of the magic of this question. Feli
therapy because their marriage was in trouble
tional situation: big and thorny and depressir
the Miracle Question, listen to how they talk
and plan together." "She would look up from
home." It's a wonderfully tangible vision.
Having answered the question, they now l
As the therapist Metcalf said, "[Elaine] ner
glancing up at him when he came in at night
He had no idea that she still would like to go
to." Those are Leverage Points! Small things
difference.*
The Miracle Question is not just for ther
it can surface disagreements about your dire
maybe your boss yammers constantly abou
centric" organization. But nobody has quite
ing of what that means.
So ask the Miracle Question to the tear
tomorrow and we've transformed into a custom
What are the first things we notice?
*Note that the Miracle Question is not the same ‹
genie: "In my miracle, l'd win the lottery and my l
George Clooney and my kids would be kind." The q
ity but not magic. It's only the third part of that "wi
kind"-where the question could realistically provi
would you notice, behaviorally, if you woke up an
"kind"? Do you sometimes see those behaviors alre
Are there things that *you* do that seem to elicit tho32
RESET
I have used this question myself in organizational-change work-
shops, and the question can be transformative. But be warned: It
usually requires some persistence. Usually, people hem and haw a
bit and then leap to how they'd be feeling. "I'd be so happy. I'd feel
so relieved." That's a good start. But keep redirecting them to the
visible signs of the miracle. What did you notice that clued you in that
something great had happened?
When you steer the conversation toward observations, you en-
sure that it's tangible enough to flush out any hidden disagreement.
One person says: "Well, after the Customer-Centric Miracle hap-
pens, hmmm... I'd get to work and I'd bump into a group that
was leaving HQ to spend time at a customer site, to get to know
the customer's problems better." Another chimes in: "Oh, I wasn't
thinking about it that way-I was thinking that it was more about
cutting internal projects that weren't directly connected to the cus-
tomer."
Now you have something useful to argue about! Because in
the absence of this debate-about the true meaning of customer-
centricity-you and your colleagues would be unwittingly working
at cross-purposes.
The power of the Miracle Question is in the way it sharpens and
narrows your view of success. A miracle has happened, and your mar-
riage is fixed: How do you know it? Because your wife looked up from her
book when you walked in.
Notice that this is essentially the reciprocal of the "goal of the
goal" question, which compels us to broaden out-starting with a
goal and then widening the view to ask what its true intent was.
"What's the goal of the goal?" helps us see the destination and
why it's important. (A Leverage Point must be something worth
doing.)
The Miracle Question helps us identify the first productive
CONSIDER TH
steps toward that destination. (A Leverag
thing doable.)
Broaden and narrow. The two prompts t
fying tandem, a yin and yang of finding our
Picking the wrong boulder-and thus the wi
is a recipe for failure. I spoke with one CEC
of the last three companies he had run, he ha
teams focused on the right boulder. (Interes
the team's previous focus had been on somet
businesses or acquisitions-and this CEO
the health of the core business.)
Achieving clarity on the way forward is
tory. It is transformative. It can mean the di
and unstuck.
A group of federal government leaders
formation several years ago when they rethe
gram that served people with disabilities, in
context: Anyone with a "total permanent di
law, have their federal student loans discha
veterans didn't take advantage of the prog
pointment to many government leaders,
Make it easy for veterans to apply for the be
What was holding back participation in
extent it was knowledge: Many simply didn
gible for forgiveness. Others got derailed b
plication process.
The stakes were high: Some of these
ally in default-potentially having their s34
RESET
payments garnished to make loan payments. The government was
reaching into their pockets to claim money for loans that they
shouldn't have owed!
So what could be done? In 2016, a team at the Department of
Education (ED) thought: Rather than make the borrowers responsible
for discovering this benefit, let's proactively tell then about it!
They hatched a plan that led them to compare the databases at
several agencies, including the ED and the Department of Veter-
ans Affairs (VA). The ED database could tell you: Who has student
loans? The VA database could tell you: Which veterans are perma-
nently disabled? Anyone who matched both databases was eligible
for a loan discharge.
By mid-2018, the VA and ED had identified around 50,000 vet-
erans who qualified for forgiveness. (Thousands of them were in
default on those loans-they-didn't-really-owe.) Letters were sent to
all of them, informing them that they were eligible for forgiveness
and specifying how to claim it. So far, so good.
Ah, but then came another problem. The notification sent to
veterans came under the letterhead of a private organization: the
student loan servicer: The letter directed people to file their appli-
cations at a URL called "disabilitydischarge.com" Tò some recipi-
ents, it smelled a little fishy. Uh, why isn't this coming from the VA?
Why isn't it a gov address? Is this story going to end with someone ab-
sconding to Cabo San Lucas with the remainder of my checking account?
As one government insider told me, "Veterans just wouldn't do
it. They were scared. I mean, it was every red flag you could pos-
sibly imagine."
In this situation, how could you encourage veterans to file their
applications for forgiveness? Well, maybe send a less suspicious let-
ter. Or set up a gov website. Maybe some tweaks would ease the
veterans' concerns.
CONSIDER THE
But in 2019, the agency leaders stopped t
ken process and took a hard look at the goal
What's our goal? Tò help veterans apply fo
they've earned.
And what's the goal of the goal? To improve
What are alternate pathways for achieving th
ing them apply for forgiveness? Um, well, why
the whole application process? Why do the
We can figure out who they are! Let's tell
FORGIVE THEIR LOANS. And then afte
them know it's done.*
"There was a recognition that the letters c
and there was a big push to make this automa
the Department of Education said. "It wouk
rowers but it could also be good for us-it
of processing a bunch of applications, sendi
they need to be corrected. Could this be a wi
It was a radically simple idea, but it was
ment. Just getting permission from different
to compare databases— essential for forgivi
blizzard of paperwork that had taken month
through.
The ripple effects of this policy shift hav
found: Tens of thousands of disabled veter
again, had been in "default" -had their finar
One disabled navy veteran saw her loan I
*Why did they need an "okay" first? There was o
Forgiven loans might be treated as income, meaning
income tax bill for the forgiven loan. That's why the
automatically.36 RESET
$72,000 to ... zero. "I felt immense relief," she told a reporter. "I
mean, I cried about it. I ugly cried about it."
The program was so successful, in fact, that it has since been
expanded to other situations where people have earned (but not
claimed) loan forgiveness. And that's often the way Leverage Points
are uncovered. Someone comes up with a better way of doing
things, and you think, Aha! I can do that, too!
But, as we'll see next, it doesn't always have to be someone else
whom you learn from. The secrets of success might be right there,
in your own team, hidden in plain sight.
snelsweceor radesbsobenoseainde tereeet teetee eeeeee eeee eeee
CONSIDER TH
Whirlwind review: Chapter 2, Consider th
1. The second way to identify Leverage Points is
skeptical look at the goals you're pursuing.
2. Often organizations set numerical targets as go
hitting these targets while ufterly failing at your
a. The dealership altracted great scores for
only because they were browbeating custor
regardless of their actual experience!
3. To avoid that misalignment of goals and missio
the goal of the goal? And are there alternate
there more easily or quickly than the original g
a. Marisa Lavars, a mother struggling with heai
set her New Year's resolution to get fitter. Bi
of the goal, she saw clearly: She wanted to
kids more often and more playfully.
4. You can achieve more clarity about the "goal
Miracle Question.
a. The Miracle Question, in short: "A miracle
fixed your critical problem. What are the fi
you wake up, that reveal the miracle has ha
b. The married couple Elaine and Felix used the
tify little things that could change: "She wor
when I came home."
5. "What's the goal of the goal?" helps you see th
important. (A Leverage Point must be something
Question helps you identify the first productive
fion. (A Leverage Point must be something doab
6. Achieving clarity on where you're really header
a. The Depariment of Education changed its str
ier to apply for loan forgiveness" to proacti
As a result, tens of thousands of people were38
RESET
Recommendations (find live links at danheath.com/ reset-links):
If you need help picking the right boulder-i.e., knowing what to focus on
in your work--then l'd recommend the thoughtful and practical Bulletproof
Problem Solving by Charles Conn and Robert McLean. Rory Sutherland of-
fers an insightful take on potential solutions we overlook because we don't
think deep enough about the psychological goals of what we're building.
His Eurostar example, mentioned briefly in this chapter, comes around minute
six. Linda Metcalf literally wrote the book on the Miracle Question, a step-
by-step guide lo seeing your way quickly through confounding situations to
meaningful and lasting change. Its primary focus is on personal relationships,
but it also includes some advice on how to build more effective connections
within the workplace. If the truck-buying story inspired you to think more care-
fully about how to set the right goals, check out this paper called Goals Gone
Wild (and an accompanying Q & A). When goals go wrong, they can go
very wrong.
3
STUDY THE BRIG
>> You can Find Leverage
analyzing your own be