THE TACIT DIMENSION
MICHAEL POLANYI
With a New Foreword
by Amartya Sen
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS
CHICAGO AND LONDON- 1-
TACIT KNOWINGSome a an after hour that i cared as a sie
tist. I would like to tell you what I was after
making this change, for it will also explain the ge
eral task to which my present lecture should intr
duce us.
I first met questions of philosophy when I can
up against the Soviet ideology under Stalin whic
denied justification to the pursuit of science. I I
member a conversation I had with Bukharin
Moscow in 1935. Though he was heading toward h
fall and execution three years later, he was still
leading theoretician of the Communist party. Whe
I asked him about the pursuit of pure science
Soviet Russia, he said that pure science was a mo
bid symptom of a class society; under socialism ti
conception of science pursued for its own sal
would disappear, for the interests of scientists woupower to thought and thus denied also any ground:
for claiming freedom of thought
I saw also that this self-immolation of the mind
was actuated by powerful moral motives. The me-
chanical course of history was to bring universal
justice. Scientific skepticism would trust only material
ecessity for achieving universal brotherhood, Ske
cism and utopianism had thus fused into a ne
skeptical fanaticism.
It seemed to me then that our whole civilization
was pervaded by the dissonance of an extreme criti-
cal lucidity and an intense moral conscience, and
that this combination had generated both our tight-
lipped modemn revolutions and the tormented self-
oubt of modern man outside revolutionary move
nents. so I resolved to inquire into the roots of thi
Know search has enie to a harmed ideas hum of
thought and existence, rooted in the universe, seems
to emerge.
I shall reconsider human knowledge by starting
from the fact that we can know more than we can
tell. This fact seems obvious enough; but it is not
4
TACIT KNOWING
particulars of the face he knows, and the pieces ca
then be put together to form a reasonably good like
ness of the face. This may suggest that we can com
municate, after all, our knowledge of a physios
nomy, provided we are given adequate means fo
expressing ourselves. But the application of th
police method does not change the fact that pr
vious to it we did know more than we could tell a
the time. Moreover, we can use the police metho
only by knowing how to match the features we i
member with those in the collection, and we canno
tell how we do this. This very act of communicatio
displays a knowledge that we cannot tell.
There are many other instances of the recogn
tion of a characteristic physiognomy-some con
monplace, others more technical-which have th
same structure as the identification of a person. W
recognize the moods of the human face, without b
ing able to tell, except quite vaguely, by what sigt
we know it. At the universities great efforts as
spent in practical classes to teach students to ide
tify cases of diseases and specimens of rocks,
plants and animals. All descriptive sciences stuc
physiognomies that cannot be fully described
But can it not be argued, once more, that th
posits torching tie can fra dues orac
of them? The answer is that we can do so only l
relying on the pupil's intelligent co-operation f
This naming-cum-pointing is called "an ostensi
5definition"; and this philosophic expression conceals
a gap to be bridged by an intelligent effort on the
part of the person to whom we want to tell what
the word means. Our message had left something
behind that we could not tell, and its reception
must rely on it that the person addressed will dis-
cover that which we have not been able to com-
Gestalt psychology has demonstrated that we may
know a physiognomy by integrating our awareness
of its particulars without being able to identify these
particulars, and my analysis of knowledge is closely
linked to this discovery of Gestalt psychology. But
I shall attend to aspects of Gestalt which have been
hitherto neglected. Gestalt psychology has assumed
that perception of a physiognomy takes place
through the spontaneous equilibration of its par-
ticulars impressed on the retina or on the brain.
However, I am looking at Gestalt, on the contrary,
as the outcome of an active shaping of experience
performed in the pursuit of knowledge. This shap
ing or integrating I hold to be the great and indis-
pensable tacit power by which all knowledge is
discovered and, once discovered, is held to be true.
The structure of Gestalt is then recast into a logic
genius. The art of the expert diagnostician may be
listed next, as a somewhat impoverished form of dis-
technical. We have here examples of knowing, both
TACIT KNOWING
of a more intellectual and more practical kind; both
the "wissen" and "können" of the Germans, or the
"knowing what" and the "knowing how" of Gilbert
Ryle. These two aspects of knowing have a similar
structure and neither is ever present without the
other. This is particularly clear in the art of diagnos-
ing, which intimately combines skillful testing with
expert observation. I shall always speak of "know-
ing," therefore, to cover both practical and theoreti-
cal knowledge. We can, accordingly, interpret the
use of tools, of probes, and of pointers as further
instances of the art of knowing, and may add to our
list also the denotative use of language, as a kind of
verbal pointing.
Perception, on which Gestalt psychology centerec
its attention, now appears as the most impoverishec
form of tacit knowing. As such it will be showr
to form the bridge between the higher creative
powers of man and the bodily processes which are
prominent in the operations of perception.
Some recent psychological experiments have
shown in isolation the principal mechanism b
faculty a process of "subception."? These author
presented a person with a large number of nonsensTHE TACIT DIMENSION
they administered an electric shock. Presently the
person showed symptoms of anticipating the shock
at the sight of "shock syllables"; yet, on questioning,
he could not identify them. He had come to know
when to expect a shock, but he could not tell what
made him expect it. He had acquired a knowledge
similar to that which we have when we know a per-
son by signs which we cannot tell.
Another variant of this phenomenon was demon-
strated by Eriksen and Kuethe in 1958. They ex-
posed a person to a shock whenever he happened
to utter associations to certain "shock words." Pres-
ently, the person learned to forestall the shock by
avoiding the utterance of such associations, but, on
questioning, it appeared that he did not know he
was doing this. Here the subject got to know a prac-
tical operation, but could not tell how he worked it.
This kind of subception has the structure of a skill,
for a skill combines elementary muscular acts which
are not identifable, according to relations that we
cannot define.
We may carry forward, then, the following result.
In both experiments that I have cited, subception
8
TACIT KNOWING
was induced by electric shock. In the first series th
subject was shocked after being shown certain nor
sense syllables, and he learned to expect this even
In the second series he learned to suppress th
uttering of certain associations, which would evok
the shock. In both cases the shock-producing pa
ticulars remained tacit. The subject could not ider
tify them, yet he relied on his awareness of ther
for anticipating the electric shock.
Here we see the basic structure of tacit knowing
It always involves two things, or two kinds of thing
We may call them the two terms of tacit knowin;
In the experiments the shock syllables and shoc
associations formed the first term, and the electr
shock which followed them was the second terr
After the subject had learned to connect these tw
terms, the sight of the shock syllables evoked th
expectation of a shock and the utterance of ti
shock associations was suppressed in order to avo.
shock. Why did this connection remain tacit?
would seem that this was due to the fact that ti
subject was riveting his attention on the electi
particulars only by relying on our own awarenessTHE TACIT DIMENSION
them for attending to something else, namely the
electric shock, and hence our knowledge of ther
remains tacit. This is how we come to know these
particulars, without becoming able to identify
them. Such is the functional relation between the
two terms of tacit knowing: we know the fist term
only by relying on our awareness of it for attending
to the second.
In his book on freedom of the will, Austin Farrar
has spoken at one point of disattending from cer-
tain things for attending to others. I shall adopt a
variant of this usage by saying that in an act of tacit
knowing we attend from something for attending to
something else; namely, from the first term to the
second term of the tacit relation. In many ways the
first term of this relation will prove to be nearer to
us, the second further away from us. Using the lan-
guage of anatomy, we may call the first term proxi-
mal, and the second term distal. It is the proximal
term, then, of which we have a knowledge that we
may not be able to tell.
or attending to the characteristic appearance of
ice. We are attending from the features to th
10
But we may ask: does not the appearance of the
experimental setting-composed of the nonsense
syllables and the electric shocks-undergo some
change when we learn to anticipate a shock at the
sight of certain syllables? It does, and in a very sub-
tle way. The expectation of a shock, which at first
had been vague and unceasing, now becomes
sharply fluctuating; it suddenly rises at some mo.
ments and drops between them. So we may say that
even though we do not learn to recognize the shock
syllables as distinct from other syllables, we do be
come aware of facing a shock syllable in terms of
the apprehension it evokes in us. In other words, we
are aware of seeing these syllables in terms of thal
on which we are focusing our attention, which i
the probability of an electric shock. Applying thi
to the case of a physiognomy, we may say that wo
are aware of its features in terms of the physiog
nomy to which we are attending. In the exercise o
a skill, we are aware of its several muscular move.
in terms of the performance to which our attention
is directed. We may say, in general, that we ar
aware of the proximal term of an act of tacit know
ing in the appearance of its distal term; we ar
aware of that from which we are attending to an
other thing, in the appearance of that thing. W
may call this the phenomenal structure of taciTHE TACIT DIMENSION
say, therefore, that when shock syllables arouse an
apprehension in us, without our being able to iden-
tify the syllables which arouse it, we know these
syllables only in terms of their meaning. It is their
meaning to which our attention is directed. It is in
terms of their meaning that they enter into the ap-
pearance of that to which we are attending from
We could say, in this sense, that a characteristic
physiognomy is the meaning of its features; which
is, in fact, what we do say when a physiognomy ex-
presses a particular mood. To identify a physiog-
nomy would then amount to relying on our aware-
ness of its features for attending to their joint
meaning. This may sound far-fetched, because the
meaning of the features is observed at the same spot
where the features are situated, and hence it is diff-
cult to separate mentally the features from their
meaning. Yet, the fact remains that the two are dis-
tinct, since we may know a physiognomy without
being able to specify its particulars.
To see more clearly the separation of a meaning
from that which has this meaning, we may take the
int exploring. This i ho on in the c int
TACIT KNOWING
transposes meaningless feelings into meaningfu
ones, and places these at some distance from th
original feeling. We become aware of the feelings it
our hand in terms of their meaning located at th
tip of the probe or stick to which we are attending
This is so also when we use a tool. We are attendin;
to the meaning of its impact on our hands in term
of its effect on the things to which we are applyin
it. We may call this the semantic aspect of taci
knowing. All meaning tends to be displaced awa
from ourselves, and that is in fact my justificatio
for using the terms "proximal" and "distal" to de
scribe the first and second terms of tacit knowing.
From the three aspects of tacit knowing that
have defined so far—the functional, the phenome
nal, and the semantic-we can deduce a fourt
aspect, which tells us what tacit knowing is a know
edge of. This will represent its ontological aspec
Since tacit knowing establishes a meaningful rel
tion between two terms, we may identify it with th
understanding of the comprehensive entity whic
these two terms jointly constitute. Thus the prox
mal term represents the particulars of this entit
the entity by relying on our awareness of its partic
lars for attending to their joint meaning
This analysis can be applied with interesting
sults to the case of visual perception. Physiologi
is determined by our awareness of certain efforts i
side our body, efforts which we cannot feel
themselves. We are aware of these things going
inside our body in terms of the position, size, shap
and motion of an object, to which we are attendinIn other words we are attending from these interna
processes to the qualities of things outside. Thes
qualities are what those internal processes mean to
us. The transposition of bodily experiences into the
perception of things outside may now appear,
therefore, as an instance of the transposition of
meaning away from us, which we have found to be
present to some extent in all tacit knowing.
But it may be said that the feelings transposed by
perception differ from those transposed by the use
of tools or probes, by being hardly noticeable in
themselves previous to their transposition. An an-
swer to this-or at least part of an answer to it-is
to be found in experiments extending subception
to subliminal stimuli. Hefferline and collaborators
have observed that when spontaneous muscular
twitches, unfelt by the subject-but observable ex-
ternally by a million-fold amplification of their ac-
tion currents-were followed by the cessation of an
unpleasant noise, the subject responded by increas-
ing the frequency of the twitches and thus silencing
the noise much of the time.® Tacit knowing is seen
This view of perception, that it is an instance of
the transposition of feelings which we found in the
TACIT KNOWING
probes and the feats of subception, by a process o
learning which can be laborious.
Modern philosophers have argued that percep
tion does not involve projection, since we are no
previously aware of the internal processes which w
are supposed to have projected into the qualities o
things perceived. But we have now established tha
projection of this very kind is present in various ir
stances of tacit knowing. Moreover, the fact that w
do not originally sense the internal processes i
themselves now appears irrelevant. We may ventur
therefore, to extend the scope of tacit knowing t
include neural traces in the cortex of the nervot
system. This would place events going on inside or
brain on the same footing as the subliminal twitch
operated by Hefferline's subjects.*
This brings us to the point at which I hinte
when I first mentioned perception as an instance
tacit knowing. I said that by elucidating the way or
bodily processes participate in our perceptions y
will throw light on the bodily roots of all though
including man's highest creative powers. Let nTHE TACIT DIMENSION
our awareness of contacts of our body with things
outside for attending to these things. Our own body
is the only thing in the world which we normally
never experience as an object, but experience always
in terms of the world to which we are attending
from our body. It is by making this intelligent use
of our body that we feel it to be our body, and not
a thing outside.
I have described how we learn to feel the end of
a tool or a probe hitting things outside. We may
regard this as the transformation of the tool or
probe into a sentient extension of our body, as
Samuel Butler has said. But our awareness of our
body for attending to things outside it suggests a
wider generalization of the feeling we have of our
body. Whenever we use certain things for attending
from them to other things, in the way in which we
always use our own body, these things change their
appearance. They appear to us now in terms of the
entities to which we are attending from them, just
as we feel our own body in terms of the things out-
side to which we are attending from our body. In
this sense we can say that when we make a thing
function as the proximal term of tacit knowing, we
incorporate it in our body-or extend our body to
include it-so that we come to dwell in it.
The full range of this generalization can only be
hinted at here. Indications of its scope may be seen
by recalling that, at the turn of the last century,
son can be understood only by reliving its workings;
16
TACIT KNOWING
and Lipps represented aesthetic appreciation as an
entering into a work of art and thus dwelling in the
mind of its creator. I think that Dilthey and Lipps
described here a striking form of tacit knowing as
applied to the understanding of man and of works
of art, and that they were right in saying that this
could be achieved only by indwelling. But my analy-
sis of tacit knowing shows that they were mistaken
in asserting that this sharply distinguished the hu-
manities from the natural sciences. Indwelling, as
derived from the structure of tacit knowing, is a far
more precisely defined act than is empathy, and it
underlies all observations,
including all those de
scribed previously as indwelling.
We meet with another indication of the wide
functions of indwelling when we find acceptance to
moral teachings described as their interiorization.
To interiorize is to identify ourselves with the teach-
ings in question, by making them function as the
proximal term of a tacit moral knowledge, as applied
in practice. This establishes the tacit framework fol
our moral acts and judgments. And we can trace this
ing its application: its true knowledge lies in ou
ability to use it.
ing involves a shift of emphasis in our conceptios
of tacit knowing. We had envisaged tacit knowing
17THE TACIT DIMENSION
in the first place as a way to know more than we
can tell. We identified the two terms of tacit know.
ing, the proximal and the distal, and recognized the
way we attend from the first to the second, thus
achieving an integration of particulars to a coherent
entity to which we are attending. Since we were not
attending to the particulars in themselves, we could
not identify them: but if we now regard the integra-
tion of particulars as an interiorization, it takes on
a more positive character. It now becomes a means
of making certain things function as the proximal
terms of tacit knowing, so that instead of observing
them in themselves, we may be aware of them in
their bearing on the comprehensive
entity which
they constitute. It brings home to us that it is not
by looking at things, but by dwelling in them, that
we understand their joint meaning.
We can see now how an unbridled lucidity can
destroy our understanding of complex matters. Scru-
tinize closely the particulars of a comprehensive
entity and their meaning is effaced, our conception
of the entity is destroyed. Such
cases are well
the sound you make, and soon the word will sound
hollow and eventually lose its meaning. By concen
cation.
Admittedly, the destruction can be made good by
interiorizing the particulars once more. The word
uttered again in its proper context,
, the pianist's
18
TACIT KNOWING
fingers used again with his mind on his music, the
features of a physiognomy and the details of a pat-
tern glanced at once more from a distance: they all
come to life and recover their meaning and their
comprehensive relationship.
But it is important to note that this recovery
never brings back the original meaning. It may im-
prove on it. Motion studies, which tend to paralyze
a skill, will improve it when followed by practice.
The meticulous dismembering of a text, which can
kill its appreciation, can also supply material for a
much deeper understanding of it. In these cases,
the detailing of particulars, which by itself would
destroy meaning, serves as a guide to their subse
quent integration and thus establishes a
mOre
secure and more accurate meaning of them.
But the damage done by the specification of par
ticulars may be irremediable. Meticulous detailing
may obscure beyond recall a subject like history
literature, or philosophy. Speaking more generally
the belief that, since particulars are more tangible
their knowledge offers a true conception of thing
is fundamentally mistaken.
Of course, tacit reintegration of particulars is no
the only way to recover their meaning, destroyed b
focusing our attention on them. The destructiv
analysis of a comprehensive entity can be counter
acted in many cases by explicitly stating the relation
between its particulars. Where such explicit integra
tion is feasible, it goes far beyond the range of taci
integration. Take the case of a machine. One ca
learn to use it skillfully, without knowing exact!
how it works. But the engineer's understanding o
its construction and operation goes much deepe
19THE TACIT DIMENSION
Ve possess a practical knowledge of our own bod
ut the physiologist's theoretical knowledge of it
far more revealing. The formal rules of prosody may
deepen our understanding of so delicate a thing as
But my examples show clearly that, in general, an
explicit integration cannot replace its tacit counter-
part. The skill of a driver cannot be replaced by a
thorough schooling in the theory of the motorcar;
the knowledge I have of my own body differs alto-
gether from the knowledge of its physiology; and
the rules of rhyming and prosody do not tell me
what a poem told me, without any knowledge of its
We are approaching here a crucial question. The
declared aim of modern science is to establish a
strictly detached, objective knowledge, Any falling
short of this ideal is accepted only as a temporary
imperfection, which we must aim at eliminating
But suppose that tacit thought forms an indispensa-
ble part of all knowledge, then the ideal of eliminat-
ing all personal elements of knowledge would, in
effect, aim at the destruction of all knowledge. The
ideal of exact science would turn out to be funda-
mentally misleading and possibly a source of devas
the relations that constitute a comprehensive en-
tity, for example, the relations that constitute a
frog, this entity, i.e., the frog, must be first identified
informally by tacit knowing; and, indeed, the mean-
ing of a mathematical theory of the frog lies in its
20
ory to bear on its subject is itself a tacit integration
of the kind we have recognized in the use of a deno
tative word for designating its object. And we have
seen also that a true knowledge of a theory can be
established only after it has been interiorized anc
extensively used to interpret experience. Therefore
a mathematical theory can be constructed only bj
relying on prior tacit knowing and can function as
theory only within an act of tacit knowing, which
consists in our attending from it to the previousl
established experience on which it bears. Thus the
ideal of a comprehensive mathematical theory of ex
perience which would eliminate all tacit knowing i
proved to be self-contradictory and logically un
But I must not rest my case on such an abstrac
argument. Let me finish this lecture,
presenting you with a most striking concrete exam
ple of an experience that cannot possibly be repre
sented by any exact theory. It is an experienc
within science itself: the experience of seeing
problem, as a scientist sees it in his pursuit of dis
It is a commonplace that all research must stas
from a problem. Research can be successful only
the problem is good; it can be original only it th
problem is original. But how can one see a problen
any problem, let alone a good and original problen
For to see a problem is to see something that
21no one else can see the possibilities of the compre-
hension that we are anticipating. To see a problem
that will lead to a great discovery is not just to see
something hidden, but to see something of which
the rest of humanity cannot have even an inkling.
All this is a commonplace; we take it for granted,
without noticing the clash of self-contradiction en-
tailed in it. Yet Plato has pointed out this contradic-
tion in the Meno. He says that to search for the
solution of a problem is an absurdity; for either you
know what you are looking for, and then there is no
problem; or you do not know what you are looking
for, and then you cannot expect to find anything.
The solution which Plato offered for this paradox
was that all discovery is a remembering of past lives.
This explanation has hardly ever been accepted, but
neither has any other solution been offered for
avoiding the contradiction. So we are faced with the
fact that, for two thousand years and more, human-
ity has progressed through the efforts of people
solving difficult problems, while all the time it could
be shown that to do this was either meaningless or
impossible. We have here the classical case of Poe's
Purloined Letter, of the momentous document lying
casually in front of everybody, and hence overlooked
by all. For the Meno shows conclusively that if all
knowledge is explicit, i.e., capable of being clearly
stated, then we cannot know a problem or look for
its solution. And the Meno also shows, therefore,
that if problems nevertheless exist, and discoveries
can be made by solving them, we can know things,
and important things, that we cannot tell.
The kind of tacit knowledge that solves the para-
dox of the Meno consists in the intimation of some
TACIT KNOWING
thing hidden, which we may yet discover. There
another important manifestation of these
mental powers. We are often told that great scien-
tific discoveries are marked by their fruitfulness; and
this is true. But how can we recognize truth by its
fruitfulness? Can we recognize that a statement is
true by appreciating the wealth of its yet undis-
covered consequences? This would of course be non-
sensical, if we had to know explicitly what was yet
undiscovered. But it makes sense if we admit that
we can have a tacit foreknowledge of yet undis-
covered things. This is indeed the kind of fore-
knowledge the Copernicans must have meant to
affirm when they passionately maintained, against
heavy pressure, during one hundred and forty years
before Newton proved the point, that the helio-
centric theory was not merely a convenient way of
computing the paths of planets, but was really true.
It appears, then, that to know that a statement is
true is to know more than we can tell and that
hence, when a discovery solves a problem, it is itself
fraught with further intimations of an indetermi
nate range, and that furthermore, when we accepl
the discovery as true, we commit ourselves to a be
lief in all these as yet undisclosed, perhaps as yet un.
Since we have no explicit knowledge of these un
known things, there can also be no explicit justifica
hidden implications of a scientific discovery, anc
feel confident that they will prove right. We fer
sure of this, because in contemplating the discoverTHE TACIT DIMENSION
we are looking at it not only in itself but, more sig
nificantly, as a clue to a reality of which it is a mani-
festation. The pursuit of discovery is conducted
from the start in these terms; all the time we are
guided by sensing the presence of a hidden reality
toward which our clues are pointing; and the dis-
covery which terminates and satisfies this pursuit is
still sustained by the same vision. It claims to have
made contact with reality: a reality which, being
real, may yet reveal itself to future eyes in an in-
definite range of unexpected manifestations.
We have here reached our main conclusions.
Tacit knowing is shown to account (1) for a valid
knowledge of a problem, (2) for the scientist's ca-
pacity to pursue it, guided by his sense of approach-
ing its solution, and (3) for a valid anticipation of
the yet indeterminate implications of the discovery
arrived at in the end.
Such indeterminate commitments are necessarily
involved in any act of knowing based on indwelling.
For such an act relies on interiorizing particulars to
which we are not attending and which, therefore,
its to a comprehensive entity connecting them i
way we cannot define. This kind of knowin
Sle fo us to alov something so by determi it as a.
edge is of the same kind as the knowledge of a
problem.
This is in fact our result. We must conclude that
24
TACIT KNOWING
the paradigmatic case of scientitic knowledge, 1
which all the faculties that are necessary for findir
and holding scientific knowledge are fully develope
is the knowledge of an approaching discovery.
To hold such knowledge is an act deeply con
mitted to the conviction that there is somethin
there to be discovered. It is personal, in the sense o
involving the personality of him who holds it, an
also in the sense of being, as a rule, solitary; bi
there is no trace in it of self-indulgence. The di
coverer is filled with a compelling sense of respons
bility for the pursuit of a hidden truth, whic
demands his services for revealing it. His act
knowing exercises a personal judgment in relatir
evidence to an external reality, an aspect of whic
he is seeking to apprehend.
The anticipation of discovery, like discovery itsel
may turn out to be a delusion. But it is futile
seck for strictly impersonal criteria of its validity,
positivistic philosophies of science have been tryir
to do for the past eighty years or so. To accept ti
pursuit of science as a reasonable and successful e
terprise is to share the kind of commitments
which scientists enter by undertaking this enterpri
You cannot formalize the act of commitment
you cannot express your commitment non-comm
tally. To attempt this is to exercise the kind
lucidity which destroys its subject matter. Her
the failure of the positivist movement in the f
losophy of science. The difficulty is to find a stal
alternative to its ideal of objectivity. This is inde
the task for which the theory of tacit knowi
should prepare us.
25