ALSO BY DAN HEATH
Upstream: The Quest to Solve Problems Before They Happen
RES
How to Change What's
ALSO BY CHIP AND DAN HEATH
Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die
Switch: Flow to Change Things When Change Is Hard
Decisive: How to Make Better Choices in Life and Work
The Power of Moments: Why Certain Experienies
Have Extraordinary Impact
Dan He
AVID READER
New York Amsterdam/Antwerp LondonGO AND SEE THE
>> You can Find Leverage Points
up close the reality of youGO AND SEE TI
In 2016, Karen Ritter, an assistant prin
School (near Chicago), wanted to under
better serve its students. So she chose to
As part of a program called "Shadow a S
by the Stanford d.school and the desig
around a ninth-grader, Alan, for an enti
Her day with Alan started in PE. Sh
gym while students gawked and grinne
school day began. She sat next to him i
ments, just like he did. Ate cafeteria fo
she said diplomatically.)
Ritter's experience was covered by P
watching the video of Ritter's day is a
deflate in slow motion. At one point, t
she's doing. "I'm holding up," she says
language: I am not holding up.)
Particularly draining was Alan's algel6
RESET
test scores in math, he'd been slotted into a double-length remedial
period. The camera caught Ritter sneaking looks at the clock, just
like a real student. After a long stretch of instruction, the bell rang,
but to Ritter's chagrin, it wasn't for her. There were 30 more min-
utes to go. "It was brutal to sit through that," she said.
The day before her observation, Ritter was asked to complete
a report card, grading the school on a variety of factors. For "Sup~
portive Environment," she gave the school an A. Then, after her day
of shadowing, she was asked to revisit those marks.
The grade for Supportive Environment stayed an A: She was
pleased with what she experienced. But on other factors, the grades
deteriorated. Before the day, she'd scored the school a B on this
statement: "In this school, students learn actively, creating, ques-
tioning, discovering." After her day as a student, the B cratered to
a C-minus.
Similarly, with the grinding double-length algebra class fresh in
her mind, her score for "Student Engagement" dropped from a B
to a C-plus.
By shadowing a student, Ritter discovered that some of her
intuitions had been exactly right. The school really did provide a
supportive environment. In other places, though, her intuition had
been way off the mark.
SUPPORTIVE
ENVIRONMENT
ACTIVE
LEARNING
STUDENT
ENGAGEMENT
Before
A
B
B
After
C-
C+
G
She wondered about the double-lengti
stance. "We don't have proof that this is
learning," she said. "It's just making them
Alan, the double-length class had crowded
He had wanted to take classes in French anc
he couldn't do both. (Other students were
tives.)
Ritter's goal, in shadowing a student, w
improve the student experience. Her day wi
identify two potential Leverage Points: (1) 1
matic slotting of students into double-lengtl
(2) encouraging faculty to be more interact
The school would later act upon both of t
received professional development in better
the school subsequently changed its policy t
dent could have at least one elective. (Pre
had both a double-reading and a double-mai
at all in their schedule!)
In this section, we'll explore five method
age Points. Finding them will require some
times they are hidden—masked by habits
times (as we'll see on the next few pages), th
to anyone who looks. Either way, we have to
to know where to look. The tools in this s
independent ways to conduct the hunt.
What we're looking for are interventio
and worth doing. "Doable": meaning that t
short term. And "worth doing": because w
ders, not pebbles.
The first method for finding Leverage
by Ritter, an approach that Nelson RepenRESET
the work."* Repenning is a professor at MIT who studies system
dynamics. He told me that of all the principles he's shared with ex-
ecutives and students over the years, the one that most reliably pays
off is: Go and see the work.
Meaning: If you're a school principal, shadow a student for the
day. If you're a factory manager, follow the production from start
to finish. If you're a consultant, map out the flow of activities on a
single client engagement.
"Going and seeing the work" is what the hospital receiving area
team did when they began their overhaul: They followed packages
through the system, from the delivery dock to their ultimate desti-
nations in the hospital.
One executive, following Repenning's imperative to see the
work, discovered that in his company, there was a woman who
diligently maintained a repository of the firm's engineering docu-
ments. She spent long stretches of time printing high-definition
color prints and organizing them in a room full of file cabinets.
But there was a digital repository that auto-archived these files. It
had existed for years. And word never got back to this poor woman.
"When you go see the work," wrote Repenning and two col-
leagues, Don Kieffer and Todd Astor, "if you aren't embarrassed by
what you find, you probably aren't looking closely enough."†
* Repenning's phrasing is a riff on a well-known operations concept called
"going to the gembo," which originated with Talichi Ohno, the godfather of
the Toyota Production System. "Gemba" comes from a Japanese term mean-
ing the "actual place."
†Note that this spirit of examination-the genuine desire to get closer to the
truth--is the heart of "going and seeing the work." This is in sharp contrast to
the CEO who conducts a stage-managed visit to a factory or field office for
the sake of good optics: I am an enlightened leader who enjoys mingling with
you common folk!
G
Repenning, Kieffer, and Michael Morale
case study in MIT Sloan Management Review.
of a Panama City plant that made corrugate
derstand why his paper losses during produc
the industry average. So he went to see the
reported what happened next:
Mike left his office and visited the factor:
work and understand its current design. I
numerous problems. The paper was often
in extra losses from cutting. In addition, p
damaged by the forklifts that moved them
Perhaps most notably, Mike observed
rugator machine stopped at 11:30am. Assi
planned outage, Mike rushed to the ma
that the machine was stopped every day at
restarting the machine at lunchtime not
ductivity but also increased the probabilit
paper and mechanical problems. Interestir
turned out to be a response that had been
in response to instability in the electric po
local utility—a problem that had been fixe
Morales's investigation, then, surfaced s
Points for whittling down paper waste. Wit
losses fell from 21% to 15%, reflecting a say
Now, your first reaction to this story migl
doing stuff that's obviously dumb/wrong, then yo
wrong stuff. But be careful: Repenning and K
discovered similarly 'obvious' issues in almo
we have ever studied. "101
RESET
Glaring problems are sometimes the legacy of past solutions
improvisations and workarounds. Take the case of the paper plant:
As the plant manager, you observe that you're getting unsteady
power to your corrugating machine around lunchtime. It's not
good for efficiency, and it's not good for the machine itself. So you
schedule a shutdown every day to preserve the equipment. That's
proactive and wise. A great short-term solution.
But of course you'll never get an official announcement from
the utility saying, "All Clear!" so the daily shutdown continues.
Weeks become months, months become years, and habits become
enshrined. Your plant depends on so many habits for its basic func-
tioning that eventually you stop distinguishing them individually,
and rather they just collectively become The Way We Do Things.
A new employee, learning the ropes, is taught: Every day, at lunch-
time, we shut down the corrugating machine.
So what looks like "mismanagement" is often the accidental ac-
cretion of outdated habits. And the way you can begin to detect
and ultimately erode that accretion is by going and seeing the work.
You'll spot places where you and your team have acclimated to
problems-—instead of fixing them. Those long-tolerated bad habits
are Leverage Points: Correcting them is doable and worth doing.
For knowledge work, this type of observation can be harder. You
can trace a corrugated box through a factory. But can you trace, say,
the development of a market analysis by a consulting firm?
Yes. For sure, yes. But it's not as tangible. You will have to make
it tangible by mapping out the flow: Okay, for the Kipon Trucking ac-
count, we first had the kickoff meeting (two hours), and then we prepared
a research plan (six days), which we sent to the client, who returned feed-
back (to days), and then the engagement manager gave assignments to
the five core team members (one day), and then ...
You're making the invisible visible. Think whiteboards and
GO A
markers. How long does each step take? Where
or delayed? How do communications ping-pos
and the client? In what steps do the greatest le
happen? Protect those. And in what steps do th
little value? Rework or eliminate those.
In short, you can still go and see the work.
The key thing here-and the radical depart
eryday work—is that you are substituting exper
Tom Chi, a co-founder of X, the ambitious R
said that most corporate decisions are made us
People sit around and duel in the land of ideas
A sample meeting: Ted thinks you should t
Marisa hates Ted, so she pushes back on it. I
making decisions, always suggests waiting for
always a hair's breadth away from making a stra
How will it affect the CULTURE? (Gregg is eve
part of the culture.)
And on and on it goes. Ultimately, as Chi
"Either the person who is best at arguing or
highest title in the room ends up deciding." TI
is that when you make decisions that way, you
decisions based on cognitive vapor.
"Smart people will always come up with sm
guesses," said Chi. "But that does not mean ti
not guesses. ... Because it actually doesn't m
agree or disagree if it sounds smart or doesr
only thing to listen for is: When I hear someth
it a direct experience? If it's a guess, it needs to
way. ... But if it's a direct experience, then tha
to make decisions off of."
Chi's challenge to us is to get out of the "12 RESET
and into the medium of reality. When we go and see the work, we
stop debating ideas and start discovering them.
..2.
Going and seeing the work can be particularly important when
things stop working. Your marriage hits a rocky patch. Your sales
start drying up. Teachers leave your school faster than you can re-
place them.
Because when unexpected problems arise in our organizations,
it often reveals that we didn't know as much about our "system" as
we thought we did.
On this point, consider a study by the psychologists Leonid
Rozenblit and Frank Keil, who asked people to assess how well they
understood certain familiar devices. How well do you understand how
a zipper works? A flush toilet? People reported moderate levels of
understanding. On a seven-point scale, with seven reflecting the
highest level of understanding, the average score landed a bit under
four.
After the participants scored themselves, Rozenblit and Keil put
them to the test: Okay, write out a step-by-step explanation of how the
device works, from the first step to the last. Feel free to draw pictures to get
your meaning across.
There's a great You Tube video that brings this study to life. A
teenager named Alex Nickel, inspired by the research, asked some
teenage peers to explain how a toilet works. Their answers were
memorable:
TEEN 1: Well, so there's a handle, and you flush it, and it goes
through some machinery ...
GC
TEEN 2: There's like pipes going up to the 1
you press the flusher thing, and then th
around and it flushes the gross stuff out
ALEX NICKEL: How does that actually, like, l
TEEN 2: It goes down a pipe? I don't know.
TEEN 3: Water comes out into the bowl an
stuff down …
ALEX NICKEL: Can you elaborate on that? I
TEEN 3: Um, I'm not sure.
To get back to the original study: After t
ished their "explanations" of the device, t
their understanding of the device for a seco
Their self-assessments plummeted
"Nearly all participants showed drops in
knew," wrote Rozenblit and Keil in their 201
gists called this the "illusion of explanatory
"Most people feel they understand the worl
coherence, and depth than they really do.""
prodded to produce an explanation, they r
than I thought.
In another study of this illusion, conduc
and published in Memory and Cognition, peo
this skeletal picture of a bicycle frame anc
chain, and the remaining parts of the frame14
RESET
(Before you look down, pause. Could you do this exercise cor-
rectly? How confident are you?)
One person drew a bike like this. Take a second to analyze what's
wrong here.
One problem: This bike won't move; the pedals aren't attached
to any moving part of the system. And look how high the pedals are!
Are people supposed to pedal with their kneecaps?
Here was another participant's bike:
At first glance, this looks pretty fancy. Spokes and hand brakes
were added, unsolicited, for extra realism! But notice the chain and
the frame are connecting both wheels. Which means this bike can't
be turned. It's a one-way ticket to the emergency room.
Here's one more point of interest about that last bike: The per-
son who drew it reported that they went cycling most days. (Presum-
ably in a straight line?)
I'm poking fun but let me confess: I had to look up the answer
about how a bike works. I'm pretty sure
chain around both wheels, too.
So I'm inclined to empathize with the
need to understand the bike to use it effe
understanding sufficient?
The problem comes when we mistake
for systemic understanding. We think beca
because it operates as we expect, that we
a problem, because when the bike or the
working, we're sunk. We realize that u
level of understanding, there's nothing.
3.
That sudden awakening is what befalls ma
are plunged into crisis. Businesses struggl
It'll turn around. Just wait a little longer: I'v
We've been through hard times.
But then, sometimes, things don't turn
matic action wasn't taken earlier, when it
mandatory. Change or go bankrupt.
In those situations-when a business
investors or board members might hire a
That's someone who parachutes into t
the place, makes a bunch of changes, an
months.
Consider how odd this arrangement i
your business was in a pickle, you'd seck ‹
turnaround expertise, the way that you
your marriage was foundering. This isn't16
RESET
the reins to a stranger. It's like letting the therapist move in with your
spouse, fix the relationship, then turn it back over to you.*
Despite the dire circumstances involved-businesses on the
brink of bankruptcy-turnarounds frequently succeed. We're used
to thinking about organizational change as slow. But, no, in these
situations, a company might be rescued-from life support to basic
health—in a matter of months.
So let's think like a turnaround consultant. You're coming into a
company that once was viable and now isn't. This predicament trig-
gers the shift from functional to systemic understanding (as in the
toilet and bike examples above). Things were working, now they
aren't. How do you quickly make sense of what's wrong and how
to fix it?
Turnaround consultants go and see the work t They walk the halls,
they observe the production lines. But because they aren't experts
in the particular business they're now running, the observation is
not enough. They need guidance. So in trying to understand the
reality of a business, turnaround artists go straight to the front lines.
"If you really want to know what's going on in an organization,
you always ask the people closest to the customer and closest to the
core activity, whether it's providing a service or making something,"
said the turnaround consultant Paul Fioravanti on a podcast.
Jeff Vogelsang, a turnaround consultant with Promontory Point
Partners, seconds the approach. "I go to people and say, 'This is a
private conversation. I'm not gonna share anything you say. I'm
looking for common themes. I'm looking for your opinions...
"And they'll say, 'I don't care. I'll tell you everything. They can
*Could someone start working on BODY turnaround consultants? Just call me
when my six-pack is ready.
†Wait, never mind about the "body turnaround" thing..
fire me? Then they'll puke out everythi
erything that's wrong. I'll write 10 pages
out to be accurate and 10% is emotional
Within two weeks, the people who work
going on, if you're good at asking open c
and letting them ramble."
As a methodology, this could not be si
going on in your organization, talk to the
Here's what customers really think of us. Here
up. Here's why the software updates are alway
There's no black magic. It's just listeni
Parenthetically, when I've shared this
times get a polarized reaction. Some peop
Frontline people are just clock-punchers. If
they're gonna say they work too hard or they
others have an overly romantic view: Yes, p
do all the hard work and nobody listens to the
better than the suits!
I sometimes wonder whether either gr
has actually met any frontline people. Be
just people. They have smart ideas and d
not: Consult them because they're wise, self
Consult them because they know their jobs ber
are closer to reality than yours.
Going and seeing the work, ultimately
consultation.
I see we turn off the corrugating machin
that?
We thought we were helping students wit
math course, but is there any proof it's workin
their suffering?18
RESET
The payoff for this observational effort can be profound. Imag-
ine if you could locate and stop the dumbest things your team is
doing: the ill-advised, the pointless, the self-sabotaging- BOOM,
gone. What would that be worth?
There are unmistakable areas for improvement that we may
never see and brilliant ideas for change that we'll never unlock un-
less we go and see the work.
Whirlwind review: Chapter 1, Go and Ser
1. The first way to identify Leverage Points is to ob
As Nelson Repenning says, "Go and see the v
a. Assistant Principal Karen Ritter uncovered
school by shadowing a student.
2. When you go and see the work, you often disc
ious to problems, or have acclimated to them,
a. The president of the paper plant discover
chine was being shut down every day at lu
problem that had been resolved years ear
b. Mismanagement is often the accidental ac
3. Going and seeing the work is far preferable to
style of hatching improvements-what Tom Ch
a. To find real Leverage Points, you must get c
and into the medium of reality.
4. When you're trying to improve your work, y
have functional understanding rather than sy:
out that systemic understanding, it's hard to mo
a. Even regular cyclists couldn't draw a bicy
lusion of explanatory depth."
5. But it's possible to gain systemic understanding
tants do it by going straight to the front lines.
a. "The people who work there will tell you
up and let them talk.
6. Ultimately, going and seeing the work is abou
of the situation and perceiving it with fresh eye
ising Leverage Points.20
RESET
Recommendations (find live links at danheath.com/reset-links):
(Note from Dan Heath: Here's a quick explanation of these "Recommenda-
tions" sections that follow each chapter. These are not sources per se—the
endnotes are at the back of the book. Rather, the Recommendations offer
tips about places to explore beyond the book. Sometimes the links give extra
color to the points made in the text; sometimes they're the original sources
cited, when I think those sources are worth a deeper dive; sometimes they're
interesting tangents. The "links" are underlined below but please know that !
am not an insane person who thinks you can poke your finger at them to visit
a website. The idea here is that you should visit the website danheath.com/
reset-links and there you'll find this exact paragraph below, except that the
links will be clickable. Happy hunting!)
In this talk, which I highly recommend, the engineer and innovator Tom Chi
describes how he fights against guess-a-thons and gets his teams working in
the medium of reality. To see what it's like for a principal to step into the real-
ity of a student, watch the PBS NewsHour segment I mention in the chapter.
You'll see Assistant Principal Karen Ritter run sprints, battle back-to-back sec-
tions of Algebra, and write an essay alongside her ninth-grade shadowee,
Alan Garcia. If you'd like to take a deeper look at the illusion of explanatory
depth research, head here for the academic article. (And to see that video
of teenagers struggling to explain toilets, go here.) If you're curious about
the swashbuckling world of turnaround specialists, start with James Shein's
Reversing the Slide. Shein's book is both sharp and irreverent, making for an
engaging read. Or, take a listen to my conversation with the turnaround con-
sultant Jeff Vogelsang, whom I interviewed on my podcast, What It's Like to
Be ... He's the guy quoted in this chapter saying that when you interview
frontline people, they'll "puke out" everything that was relevant. For more on
"going to the gemba" — the inspiration for MIT professor Nelson Repenning's
"go and see the work" advice-check out The Toyota Way. I's a great sum-
mary of the Toyota Production System —much beloved by operations gurus. In
this article and this talk, Repenning details how you can increase the visibility
of the work you and your team are doing. This is especially important for
knowledge work, Repenning points out, where feedback is naturally far less
visible than in manufacturing.
2
CONSIDER THE
OF THE GO
> You can Find Leverage Points
alternate pathways to your ultim