Timely and important. A clear and provocative book about the
power of expectation and the endless mystery of the human mind."
-Tara Westover, #1 New York Times
bestselling author of Educated
*A sensational guide to a more psychologically rich life."
- Angela Duckworth, New York Times
bestselling author of Grit
*In Look Again, Sharot and Sunstein offer an insightful look into
the science of habituation. Their insights into the why and how of
getting used to things teach us how to hack habituation to bring
more joy to our lives. A surprising and delightful book."
—Annie Duke, bestselling author of Thinking in Bets
"Look Again is the perfect book to help you refresh your point
of view. Sharot and Sunstein reveal why it's easy to be lulled into
complacency about anything and how to prevent falling into
this trap. In the bargain, they'll help you live a happier, healthier,
wiser, and more just life."
-Katy Milkman, bestselling author of How to Change
"Such a vivid, human, and original book-the perfect guide to
perking up everything from your creativity to your love life."
-Tim Harford, author of How to Make the World Add Up
"Look Again is a fascinating guide to how and why our biased
minds get used to stuff and how we can fight through our usual
adaptations. It's a must-read for anyone who wants to feel happier,
stay more present, and make healthier, more effective decisions."
-Laurie Santos, Chandrika and Ranjan Tandon
Professor of Psychology at Yale University and
host of The Happiness Lab podcast
LOO
AGAI
THE POWER OF NC
WHAT WAS ALWAY
Tali Sharot ar
Cass R. Sunste
ONE SIGNAL
PUBLISHERS
ATRIA
New York • Amsterdam/Antwerp • London • Toronto •100
LOOK AGAIN
cret of his success was not his muscles or speed. It was his
mind. But once his innovation was known to all, those with
better physical abilities took his place on the podium. Fos-
bury never made it to a second Olympics, but his invention
certainly did. Today, seeing athletes jump backward is the
norm-something to which fans of the sport have all habit-
uated
In 1988, two decades after Fosbury won Olympic gold, a
high school coach, just for fun, demonstrated the straddle
method, which had dominated the sport for so long. One of
his jumpers responded, "What in the world is that?" Another
exclaimed, "Now that is goofy!" 21
In high-jumping as well as elsewhere, the intriguing ques-
tion now is: What will be the next big flop?
LYING:
HOW TO KEEP YOUR CHIL
GROWING A LONGN
It starts out with you taking a little bit,
a few hundred, a few thousand. You
comfortable with that, and before you l
it snowballs into something big.
-BERNARD MADOFF!
AL HAS A SON named Leu. When Leo was
Tali took him to the emergency room. "Heh
sleeps through the night!" she explained to the
tor, who did not seem at all alarmed. "Babies ar
be so calm, she tried. "His sister used to screar
The kind doctor had other crises to manag
at ease, the doctor examined Leo. First, she t
ture and listened to his heart-all normal. Ne
pupils- they were the perfect size and shape
hearing and Moro reflex-all intact.
101102
LOOK AGAIN
"He is a happy baby and a good sleeper, she concluded.
"Count your blessings."
Tali did just that.
Six years later Leo still goes to bed happily every night-
just as long as his older sister, Livia, does too. He can't bear the
thought of her having fun while he is asleep. She, on the other
hand, does not need as much sleep. What to do?
One option would be to tell Livia to pretend she is going
to bed, then allow her to get up once her brother falls asleep.
But could a small lie, repeated night after night, make Livia
comfortable with fibbing? Would Tali unintentionally be trig-
gering a deep psychological process that would increase, ever
so slightly, Livias chances of becoming the next Elizabeth
Holmes? If Tali intends on raising an honest child, should she
be concerned about seemingly harmless small untruths??
To answer this question, consider one of Tali's childhood
friends, Jonah. Jonah was a talented, smart, well-liked, and
self-assured kid. He had, however, one unusual feature he was
insecure about: he was born without his right pinkie toe. Jonah
was concerned that the other kids would mock him for having
nine toes instead of ten, so he kept his anomaly a secret.
This was not easy. In the heart of the Negev desert, where
Tali grew up, sandals were worn 250 days a year, and from
April to October the most popular after-school hangout was
the community pool. Jonah had to constantly make up ex-
cuses for why he was keeping his shoes on. "I can't jump into
the pool today because of the sniffles, he would say. "My cat
ate my flip-flops," he claimed.
Lies became second nature to Jonah. Over time, he told
Lying: How to keep your child from growing
more and more of them in situations that ha
with his right pinkie toe. If he could think uf
would get him out of an inconvenient task, he
ished version of the truth cast him in a better l
it. Most of us lie occasionally. But for Jonah s
an unconscious habit.
THE BRAIN HABITUATES TO DISHC
Is Jonah particularly immoral or flawed? Perha
is just an average joe who found himself in a u
mistakenly believing that the only way to av
was to lie. One lie led to the next, which led
suspected that Jonah was not much different
us. If any of us found ourselves in such circun
we slide down the slippery slope? To find out,
leagues put one hundred honest citizens at tl
pery hill and gave them a small shove.
They invited those one hundred people tr
pairs in a study that was conducted in Tali's lat
don. One of these pairs were Leanora and Rir
the women were greeted by Neil, the lead res
plained that during the experiment they woul
ries of jars partially filled with coins. Their tas
how much money was in each jar. Leanora w
the task in a brain-imaging scanner, while Rix
plete the task in an adjacent room.
There was a small twist: Leanora would 1104
LOOK AGAIN
images of the jars on her screen, while Rina would be shown
small, fuzzy images on hers. Leanora would thus need to ad-
vise Rina on how much money was in each jar by communi-
cating via Wi-Fi. Rina would then convey her guess to Neil,
and the more accurate she was, the more money Rina and
Leanora both would receive.
Neil left Rina in the testing room and took Leanora down
to the MRI scanner and told her of yet another twist.
• "Rina
does not know this," he whispered, "but while she will be paid
the most if she guesses the correct amount in the jar, you-
Leanora-will be paid the most if Rina overestimates the
amount of money in the jar."
Neil did not instruct Leanora to lie, but in this situation
lying would benefit her financially at the expense of Rina.
Leanora now had a conflict of interest: her task was to advise
Rina to the best of her ability, but Leanora would earn more
money if she lied to Rina. The situation is like that of a real
estate agent representing a buyer. The agent's task is to get the
buyer the best deal possible. Yet the more the client pays for
the home, the more money the agent will pocket (as agents
receive a percentage of the sale price).
What did Leanora do?
Like most volunteers in our study, she started off by lying,
but by only small amounts—a few pence here and there. But
as the experiment progressed, she lied by greater and greater
amounts. By the end of the study, she was hugely overesti-
mating the number of coins in the glass jars. We wondered
if Leanora was in fact lying or was innocently misestimating
the number of coins in the jar. So, on some trials we told her
Lying: How to keep your child from growing
she would receive the most money if Rina was
estimates. Lo and behold, when Leanora was
give Rina truthful advice, Leanora did. She co
number of coins in a jar perfectly well. She sin
do so when it was not advantageous for her.
While Leanora was performing the task,
brain activity. At first, parts of her brain that
such as the small almond-shaped region de
called the amygdala, responded strongly whe
would her amygdala be active? Well, like m
nora believed that lying was wrong, and so
lied, she experienced a negative feeling." Th
sponse was affected by the magnitude of I
response was detected only in her emotion
other brain areas.
Here is the most interesting thing. With
lie she told, we observed a reduction in
response— a form of habituation to her lying.
drop in her brain's sensitivity to her dishones
lied the next time she had a chance. In the
uneasy feeling people usually experience wh
morally, there was nothing to curb her dishon
Leanoras behavior was typical. Examining
data, we found a general effect: as the respon
emotional system to lying decreased, the an
* This negative feeling, which keeps us from lying, may be e
tageous. This is because while lying can lead to gains in the
our reputation in the long run, which comes with a serious106
LOOK AGAIN
people lied increased. At the end of the study we asked Lea-
nora about her lying, and she said she was completely un-
aware that her lies were snowballing. She had habituated to
her lies to such an extent that she did not even notice what
had happened
WHEN EMOTIONS FADE
Let's think back to the scenario we presented to you in the in-
troduction. You are walking home one day and a large brown
dog with sharp teeth barks at you, apparently in rage. Most
likely you will feel a good amount of fear. The next day you
pass by the same dog, and again it snarls at you. Only this time
you don't feel as afraid as you did the day before. Fast-forward
to a week later, and you hardly experience any emotional reac-
tion to that dog's barks.
As you may remember, studies have shown that when peo-
ple are initially presented with scary images, such as those of
people shooting guns or of scary dogs, they exhibit a strong
emotional response. Their heart rate increases, their pupils
expand, and neurons in their amygdala fire. Yet, with each ad-
ditional presentation of the same picture, their response de-
creases further and further, until it subsides altogether.
Generally speaking, this form of habituation (which is
sometimes referred to as emotional adaptation or emotional
habituation) is a clever feature of the brain. Emotion is a signal
that broadcasts, "This is important, take notice, you may need
to react." But if something appears again and again without
Lying: How to keep your child from growing
severely affecting us, it's probably not that im
which means that emotion can subside. Em
tion is not just about fear; you can adapt to ar
or bad, such as love, excitement, and shame.
Leanora experienced such emotional h
why her emotional reaction decreased furt.
every time she lied. Repeated dishonesty i
perfume you apply over and over. At first y
its distinctive scent every time you spritz. Bu
with repeated applications, you can hardly
ence, so you apply it more liberally, oblivious
will sit by you on your morning commute. Th
cause neurons in your olfactory bulb desensit
of the perfume. Similarly, your emotional re
own dishonesty is initially strong but decre:
Without a negative emotional reaction to yo
more likely to lie.
If we gave you a pill that would magically e
ability to feel emotion, you would likely lie mo
hypothetical example. In an experiment a gro
about to take an exam were given pills called
which reduce emotional arousal; they were
to cheat compared to students who receive
The medication artificially reduced that ne
that curbed cheating (a bit like the way habit
repeated lying does). Our moral nature, whic
consider to be a deep reflection of who we ar
modulated by biological functions that can be
tiny pill.108
LOOK AGAIN
THE POLITICS OF LIES
Jonah's repeated lying so as to conceal his missing toe trig-
gered an effect similar to that of a beta-blocker. He no longer
felt bad when fibbing and as a result did it more and more.
Perhaps you can think of friends or family members who are
in similar situations? Individuals in an extramarital affair who
at first agonize over their actions, but after years of the cheat-
ing feel no remorse about it? Or others who lie repeatedly for
social gain on social media or dating sites? Or those who tell
frequent falsehoods to advance their careers? All these indi-
viduals likely habituate to their lying
When Tali's study came out, just weeks before the 2016
presidential election in the United States, it hit a nerve. Many
saw a connection between the findings and the behavior of the
presidential candidate (and later president) Donald Trump,
who was accused of repeated lying. Interestingly, fact-checking
of his statements showed that in the first hundred days of his
presidency he averaged almost five false public claims a day.
That number nearly doubled months later, rising to nine a day,
and reached over nineteen public false statements a day by
the end of his term.?
Many factors may lie behind this continuous rise. Per-
haps the increase is due to a reporting bias— that is, more of
Trump's falsehoods may have been reported over time rather
than more being actually uttered by him. Another possibility
is that past lies needed to be covered up by more lies, causing
a falsehood escalation. Or maybe lies led to personally bene-
ficial consequences, leading to more and more lies. One study
Lying: How to keep your child from growing
found that dishonesty pays off in politics: politi
not averse to lying were more likely to get reel
could cause lying to increase, but alongside all
that in politics, as elsewhere, repeated lying trig
habituation that enables more and more lies.
The picture becomes even more alarming
sider that individuals may habituate not onl
dishonesty but also to that of others. Politi
this suggests that both voters and political ac
come desensitized to a politician's falsehoods i
that they do to the overused Chanel perfume
making them less likely to act to punish, and p
dishonest behavior. A politician may in turn in
sence of sanctions as a "green light." And so, as
falsehoods increases, less and less outrage mi
from the public.
This is exactly what happened in the Unite
living through what has become known as the"
the number of Americans who said it was fine
facts to make a story more interesting grew fror
2004 to a staggering 66 percent in 2018.10
Habituation to the lies of others is a probler
all around you, not just in politics. It happens ir
ence, personal relationships, and social media
example, that you take a job as a content editor
guru" named Belle. Your job is to copyedit cont
and post it on her popular website and social m
These accounts have millions of followers, so y
about your new job.110
LOOK AGAIN
The first piece you receive from Belle is about the incred-
ible healing properties of eggplants. Who knew the purple
vegetable was especially therapeutic! Out of curiosity, you
conduct a Google search, which reveals no evidence in sup-
port of the claim. When you ask Belle about it, she explains
that, yes, there is no evidence at present, but there may be
evidence in the future. You do enjoy a good baba ghanoush,
so you cross every t and dot every i and publish the piece.
The next day you receive a piece claiming that ostrich eggs,
which are offered for sale on Belles website, boost reproduc-
tion (of humans, that is, not birds). While this sounds a bit off,
you copyedit and publish the piece. Who knows? Maybe there
is something to it. This kind of thing repeats each day.
A couple of months into the job, you get assigned a piece
suggesting that "clean eating" is a more effective treatment for
cancer than chemotherapy. Belle urges cancer patients to opt
out of chemotherapy. This article, unlike those about eggplants
or bird eggs, may have serious consequences for patients. Now
imagine that you receive the same story, not two months into
your job, but on your very first day. Under which scenario will
you be more likely to edit and publish the article?
Because people are much more likely to engage in unethi-
cal acts when such behavior gradually increases over time than
when it emerges abruptly," under the latter scenario you will be
less likely to publish the piece. When ethical erosion is gradual,
people are less likely to take notice and more likely to engage in
wrongdoing. But when it comes out of nowhere, it is clear that
a line is crossed, and people react accordingly. In other words,
stories about therapeutic eggplants and reproduction-boosting
Lying: How to keep your child from growing
bird eggs blur the line between what is true a
what is acceptable and what is intolerable. I
norm. When a much more troublesome situati
under normal circumstances would be obvious
it appears far closer to the acceptance line thar
wise.
The foregoing example is not purely a prod
ination. It is based on former Australian well
Gibson.12 Gibson was a star "influencer." She
healthy-eating app that was backed by App
published by Penguin, and a large online foll
gram, Facebook, and other social media platfo
In her book and on her media accounts, G
her followers that she had cancer, which she w
a healthy diet, physical exercise, meditation, a
native treatments. Her posts and blogs detai
journey, which she claimed was triggered by
cer vaccine. In her account, it had spread to he
uterus, liver, and kidneys.
She was managing it well, she said, by usin
dies rather than chemotherapy. Gibson posted
self looking fit and healthy, so many were mov
routines. Some cancer patients were even pers
conventional medicine.
Gibson's success grew exponentially for y
day an investigative journalist revealed it was
Gibson never had brain cancer, nor did she ha
ney cancer. There were no records of her being
any cancer whatsoever. She lied about her heal112
LOOK AGAIN
her finances. Money she claimed to have donated to charities
from her company's profits was never received.
Unsurprisingly, Gibson had a track record of falsehoods
going back to childhood. As a teenager she falsely claimed to
have died momentarily on the operating table while under-
going heart surgery. She never had heart surgery. Her friends
remember Gibson lying constantly. Those seemingly harmless
childhood fibs grew over the years into lies that made her mil-
lions, while risking the health of her followers. 13
A blueprint like Gibson's is detectable in many otherwise
diverse stories of grand deceit that have become front-page
news over the years. All of them-from Rachel Dolezal, who
falsely claimed to be Black, and Elizabeth Holmes, who used
fraudulent claims to build a biotechnology empire, to George
Santos, the member of Congress who lied about his education
and his employment, to behavioral scientist Diederik Alexan-
der Stapel, who fabricated scientific data'4-had one thing in
common. Their dishonest acts could be traced back to a se-
quence of smaller transgressions that gradually escalated.
None of this is to say that people who find themselves in a
position like Jonah's, in which they feel a need to lie repeatedly,
will all end up committing serious crimes. Jonah himself grew
up to be a good father and a respected member of society (al-
though he never got rid of his lying habit). Nor are we saying
that pretending to go to bed every night for the sake of domes-
tic bliss will eventually lead to grand deceit. Numerous com-
plex factors lead certain individuals to orchestrate the world's
largest Ponzi scheme or to fake cancer, and many of them have
nothing to do with habituation.
Lying: How to keep your child from growing
What we are saying is that small lies ca
more frequent and larger lies. In the words of
"It starts out with you taking a little bit, mayb
a few thousand. You get comfortable with tha
know it, it snowballs into something big."'5 It
Holmeses and the Gibsons of this world, and
for you too.
THE SELFLESS LIE
You might wonder whether dishonesty alw
whether it matters if lies are told "for good I
the selfless lie, one that is told purely for the b
person. Covering up for a colleague at work
blame for a mistake a sibling committed are
less lying. People often don't feel too bad abou
may feel virtuous and so have nothing to whic
In our coins-in-the-jar experiment, we Cre
in which advisers (such as Leanora) could lie i
see (such as Rina) without any benefit to them:
that people did lie for the benefit of others, ev
strangers, but those lies did not escalate.
We also created another situation where li
both the liar and the other person. Here we foun
calate, although not as dramatically as when pe
selfish reasons. We speculate that our volunteer:
lying, as they were doing it for their own benefit
that it also benefited the other person softened114.
LOOK AGAIN
Some of the most famous liars in recent times-including
Gibson and Holmes-did benefit others. Their lies benefited
their families and their employees. Gibson had a young son;
Holmes provided jobs for company employees. Their lies gave
hope to their followers and clients, though that hope turned
out to be based on a scam.
Believing that your dishonesty aids others may make it
seem justifiable. Yet it does not completely clear you of guilt,
shame, and fear-at least not at the beginning of the journey.
Think back to Madoff's words-"You get comfortable with
that," he says, referring to lying. l Those words suggest that at
some point he was not comfortable with it. Rather, he became
comfortable with his scam over time.
This last point may distinguish psychopaths from the
Madoffs of the world. Perhaps the Madoffs were uncomfort-
able with their act at first, while the psychopaths never were.
They felt nothing from the very beginning.
NIP IT IN THE BUD?
Knowing that dishonesty escalates due to habituation has
clear implications for how to decrease it at home and at work:
nip it in the bud.
If you ignore small transgressions, they may slowly snow-
ball to acts with serious consequences. People might get used
to dishonesty and no longer consider it wrong. At home, call-
ing out kids when they lie, so they feel remorse, may make
them less likely to habituate to their own dishonesty. Such in-
Lying: How to keep your child from growing
terventions will generate clear norms about u
and what isn't, before things get ugly.
In the workplace, you might well be bette
much bigger problems by creating an atmosphe
cule lies (such as cheating by a few dollars on es
acceptable. This is how we run our own teams.
sions are immediately addressed in order to deli
sage. We do this to avoid the possibility of large
(for example, scientific misconduct) in the fut
lead to serious negative consequences, not just l
person, but to other people within and outside
Norms are often rigid: do not lie (ever), do
do not be disrespectful toward your parents (e
veal confidential information (ever), do not br
ises (ever). The rigidity of the norms may seen
but that is the point. They ensure an intense
tion that makes it more difficult for people to g
with their moral transgressions.
Ordinary life offers many examples of thin
egregious moral wrongs, and we will not do tho
if there would be benefits from doing so. We u
first step. As possible examples, consider the fo
• How much would you have to be paid to
tion's flag?
• How much would you have to be paid t
the head, hard?
• How much would you have to be pair
mother in the face?116
LOOK AGAIN
• How much would you have to be paid to make cruel re-
marks to an overweight person about his or her appear-
ance?
Many people say that no amount of money would be
enough. In a way, that seems absurd. If someone would pay
you a fortune to burn your nation's flag, you could use the
money to help people in need; you could even use the money
to promote patriotism (and to make a lot more flags). We are
aghast at the thought of kicking a dog in the head, hard, and
we are not sure whether we could do it (even if no one would
ever see or know we did), but what if the monetary reward
would save the lives of one hundred dogs, or ten thousand
dogs? You get the idea.
People think that some trade-offs are taboo and that some
values are "protected" or "sacred," which means that people
would be reluctant to violate them even if the rewards for
doing so are high and punishments nil. Is Indeed, people report
intense negative emotions when they are asked to trade off cer-
tain values-
—as, for instance, when they are asked whether to
increase risks of death to some (as in the case of experimental
medical treatments) in the interest of decreasing risks to many.
Amid the COVID-19 pandemic, for example, a well-known
behavioral economist was hired to advise his government on
how to combat the spread of the disease. The economist sub-
mitted a report with an unusual recommendation: he advised
the government to infect an army base with the virus to closely
study the spread of the disease, examine symptoms, and quan-
tify the effectiveness of different interventions. The economist
Lying: How to keep your child from growing
also shared his recommendation with the pres
was that while a few lives might be lost, many
to be saved from the knowledge gained. Neither
nor the citizens were impressed; the majority v
Economists tend to think that the whol
trade-offs is a mystery, or a violation of basic
we focus on habituation, the mystery might st
social norm against ever doing X or Y or Z, en
ple feel ashamed or terrible when they conter
Z, can stop people from starting on a path tha
harm and horror. If a culture has a strong noi
or cheating, such that the very thought trigg
ative emotions, it might protect itself against 1
The philosopher Bernard Williams suggest
think about how to maximize utility in some 1
(such as whether to leap into the street to save a
are having "one thought too many. In his view,
do the right thing, without thinking much abo
meant to make a philosophical point about the
morality. We do not know if he was right, but 1
a certain psychological sense. It might well be
just think "I will not lie" rather than "Lying isn'
particular circumstances, given all relevant cosi
THE INVENTION OF LYING
Where does all this leave a parent at 8:00 p.m.
comes sleepy but resists turning in until his sis118
LOOK AGAIN
parent can't treat small lies as purely harmless. If we let small
lies slide, people can get comfortable lying and will do so more
often. That is doubly true for children, who are developing life-
long habits. Nipping dishonesty in the bud can prevent it from
escalating, so parents should resist encouraging minor acts of
dishonesty. But truth be told, it's not always easy.
Imagine living in a world where people are unable to pro-
duce falsehoods. If your date is wearing an unflattering outfit,
you tell him so. At a job interview, you candidly list your vir-
tues and flaws. When selling a used car, you quote its exact
worth. On Instagram you post only unfiltered photos. On the
positive side, there are no "fakes" deep or shallow. But there is
also no fiction, no storytelling, no Santa Claus or tooth fairies.
What would such a world look like??
The Invention of Lying, a film written by and starring Ricky
Gervais, explores a world in which lying does not exist. When
Gervais's character utters the first ever lie told by a human
being, he is unsure how to describe what he has just done.
The word lie does not exist, so the word truth has not been
invented either. "I said something that ... wasn't" he tries to
explain. The film is not a cinematic triumph. But it's ingenious.
It demonstrates the delicate balance between the necessity of
little lies for maintaining a stable social milieu (e.g., telling your
friend you are canceling at the last minute because of a cold
rather than admitting you found something better to do), and
the hazard of big lies that cause devastation (e.g., intentional
falsehoods that lead to a war).
Nowadays the distinction between truths and lies seems
to be fading. In some respects, lying has become an acceptable
Lying: How to keep your child from growing c
part of modern life, where with the click of a
build an alternate persona only loosely resen
As a result, you will often encounter falsehood
contribute to a significant problem in the m
misinformation.