*Timely and important. A clear and provocative book about the
power of expectation and the endless mystery of the human mind."
-Tara Westover, #1 New York Times
bestselling author of Educated
"À sensational guide to a more psychologically rich life."
-Angela Duckworth, New York Times
bestselling author of Grit
*In Look Again, Sharot and Sunstein offer an insightful look into
the science of habituation. Their insights into the why and how of
getting used to things teach us how to hack habituation to bring
more joy to our lives. A surprising and delightful book."
—Annie Duke, bestselling author of Thinking in Bets
"Look Again is the perfect book to help you refresh your point
of view. Sharot and Sunstein reveal why it's easy to be lulled into
complacency about anything and how to prevent falling into
this trap. In the bargain, they'll help you live a happier, healthier,
wiser, and more just life."
—Katy Milkman, bestselling author of How to Change
"Such a vivid, human, and original book—the perfect guide to
perking up everything from your creativity to your love life."
—Tim Harford, author of How to Make the World Add Up
"Look Again is a fascinating guide to how and why our biased
minds get used to stuff and how we can fight through our usual
adaptations. It's a must-read for anyone who wants to feel happier,
stay more present, and make healthier, more effective decisions."
-Laurie Santos, Chandrika and Ranjan Tandon
Professor of Psychology at Yale University and
host of The Happiness Lab podcast
LOOK
AGAIN
THE POWER OF NOTICING
WHAT WAS ALWAYS THERE
Tali Sharot and
Cass R. Sunstein
ONE SIGNAL
PUBlISHERS
ATRIA
New York • Amsterdam/Antwerp • London • Toronto • Sydney • New Delhi5
CREATIVITY:
OVERCOMING THE HABITUATION
OF THOUGHT
Without change there is no innovation, creativity, or
incentive for improvement.
-C. WILLIAM POLLARD!
S A TEENAGER, DICK Fosbury felt like a flop. A student
at Medford High School in Oregon, he loved sports, but
he was not especially good at them. In high school he aspired
to join the football team, but was told he was too small. So
he tried the basketball team, but was told he was unskilled.
So he joined the track-and-field team, but there too he strug-
gled to find his place. He finally settled on the high jump, but
failed to clear five feet-the minimum required to qualify for
many high school track meets. Fosbury knew he had to make
a change if he was to, in his own words, "first of all, stop losing,
and second of all, stay on the team."
If you watch a high jump event today, you will see the
8788
LOOK AGAIN
athletes run toward the bar following a J-shaped route, then
jump over facing the sky with their back to the bar. This tech-
nique, the Fosbury flop, is named after its inventor-Dick Fos-
bury. But in the early 1960s, when Fosbury was still in high
school, all the athletes jumped facing forward. That was how
it was done, and no one thought of doing it differently. Until
Fosbury came along.
People laughed at him. They thought that the Fosbury flop
was absurd. They thought he was going to break his neck. "I
don't think many people took him too seriously, said Frank
Toews, a teammate.* No one jumped like that.
But Fosbury had the last laugh. In 1968 he won the gold
medal in the high jump at the Olympics. As one of his college
friends put it, "Everyone was talking about revolution, but
there was this herd mentality of copycats; one guy grew his
hair long, so everybody else did. But he had something truly
different. Dick Fosbury was the only true revolutionary I ever
met." 3
When you observe people doing the same thing in the same
way, over and over, your mind stops registering their action; it
stops responding. In a sense, you habituate. You expect people
to sit at the front when they drive and the back when they
don't; to wear shoes on their feet and gloves on their hands; to
eat ice cream with a spoon, not a fork. So when people do any
of those things, there is nothing much to process. There is no
"surprise" signal in your brain to draw attention and make you
think, "Hey, maybe we can do things differently?"
But once in a while someone does come along and wonder
whether the way we have always done things is the only way,
Creativity: Overcoming the habituation of thoughi
the best way. Someone who thinks, "Hey, maybe humans can
travel by air, not only on the ground?" or "Hey, maybe books
can be sold online rather than in a physical store?" or "Hey,
maybe you can jump higher facing backward rather than for-
ward?" The question, then, is: What makes certain individuals
dishabituate to the status quo and ultimately innovate?
Part of the answer is need. If Fosbury excelled at forward-
facing high jumps, he would probably not have given the
technique a second thought. But Fosbury could not make the
standard jump work for him. His frustration, which luckily
was combined with a dose of ambition, was key in nudging
him to think about whether and how he could jump differ-
ently from the rest. In some sense, Fosbury's flops led to the
Fosbury flop. But need is just the beginning, and it is hardly
enough.
The early 1960s were already a time of change in high-
jumping, even before Fosbury came up with his revolutionary
backward jump. First, while all athletes were jumping forward,
they were using two different techniques: the straddle method
and the scissors method. The two are quite different from
each other. This variety in the field signaled that more than
one solution was possible. Second, the high jumpers' physical
environment was changing. The existing sawdust, sand, and
wood-chip landing surfaces were being replaced with three
feet of soft foam rubber. The new and softer surface opened up
the possibility of landing on ones back without injury.
Fosbury needed that. But beyond this practical aspect, the
change of surface may, in and of itself, have encouraged Fos-
bury to think differently about jumping.
8990
LOOK AGAIN
PRIMED FOR CHANGE
How might a small change, such as a new landing mattress,
boost innovative thinking? Experiments suggest that even
minor changes have the power to trigger dishabituation by sig~
naling that a new situation needs to be navigated. As a result,
people are more likely to rethink the status quo. For example,
after people move to a new country, they become better at
solving creative puzzles.? Presumably, the need to deal with a
completely new environment increases flexible thinking. This
mental transformation generalizes to all aspects of life, includ-
ing puzzle solving.
But you don't need to uproot to another country to enjoy
a creative boost. Modest changes, such as going for a run after
sitting at your computer for a while, help too. A large body
of literature links physical activity to creative thinking"s Most
people assume that physical exercise increases creativity be-
cause it improves mood, but that's not the whole story.
A series of experiments led by Kelly Main® revealed that
change in activity in and of itself (for example, from sitting
to walking or from walking to sitting) enhances creative
thought because it gears the mind for change. To measure
creative thought, Kelly asked volunteers to complete one of
two tasks. In one task, volunteers were given groups of three
words and asked to find a fourth word that could be attached
to each of the other words to create a compound phrase. For
* Note that while a meta-analysis of the relevant literature suggests the rela-
tionship between the two exists, the effect size is small.
Creativity: Overcoming the habituation of thought
instance, if we gave you the words cup, fingers, and peanut,
you could respond with ... butter (buttercup, butterfingers,
peanut butter).
Here are some more examples for you to try:
1. sense, courtesy, place
2. political, surprise, line
3. dream, break, light
4. flake, mobile, cone
5. river, note, account
People who do well on this task tend to score higher on
other measures of creativity too. But Kelly and her team did
not rely only on this task to measure creativity. They also
asked volunteers to come up with unusual uses for house-
hold items. For example, try to think of uncommon uses for
an empty paper-towel roll. Maybe you can insert rolls into
your boots to keep their shape while in storage, or maybe you
can use them to store rubber bands in. People who come up
with many unusual uses tend to score higher on other cre-
ative tasks as well.
The key to Kelly's experiment was that one group of
volunteers was seated while completing the tasks, while
another changed from seated to walking and then back
again to seated. Kelly found that the group that was always
seated came up with fewer unusual uses of iters and fewer
* If you are curious about the common answers to the above word triplets, they
are l. common; 2. party; 3. day; 4. snow; 5. bank.
91LOOK AGAIN
compound-word answers. She replicated this result three
times with different groups of volunteers. Even more in-
terestingly, she found that the boost in creativity was most
prominent both shortly after people started walking and
shortly after they sat down. This suggests that change per se
may increase creative thought. 1o
Revealingly, the boost in creativity subsided over time
as volunteers habituated to their condition. That is, walking
boosted creativity at first, but as people continued walking,
they got used to it, and creativity subsided. On average, the
boost in creative thought lasted for about six minutes after
people started walking. Once people sat down, creative think-
ing went up again, only to subside after habituation (this time
to sitting) kicked in."
That was not all. Merely anticipating change was enough
to boost creative thought. When the scientists told the vol-
unteers that they would shortly change their activity, the
researchers observed an increase in creativity scores. Kelly
and her team believe that this is because when people an-
ticipate change, their mind gears up for the need to pro-
cess information differently, which leads to more flexible
thought. 12
Mind you, the effects Kelly and her team found were rela-
tively small. Yet, even a small boost in creativity may help us
move closer to that elusive eureka moment. So it may be a
good idea to get out of your chair and have a little walk or go
for a jog. Or perhaps change your work environment occasion-
ally. Move from your office to your kitchen to a coffee shop,
then go back again. Such variations may work too.
Creativity: Overcoming the habituation of thought
THE VALUE OF SLOW HABITUATION
Okay, so Kelly's work suggests that change increases creative
thinking and habituation reduces it. Does it then follow that
people who habituate more slowly are more creative? The psy-
chologist Shelley Carson, who has written extensively about
creativity, suspected so.13 Slow habituation may enable a per-
son to see what others no longer do and therefore perceive
opportunities for improvement.
Most people are quick at creating expectations of what will
happen next, when, why, and how. They are quick at generat-
ing a mental model of the world around them. But if you make
fewer assumptions of how things should be, you may be open
to new possibilities. Different variations of this idea had been
floated by scientists before but had not been properly tested.
Shelley and her colleagues decided to do so.
Shelley's first step was to identify a group of "eminent cre-
ative achievers, as she called them. These are individuals who
have made a significant contribution to a creative field-for
example, people who had an invention patented or a book
published or had a private showing of their artwork or sold
a musical composition or won a national prize for scientific
discovery or other such achievements. She would compare
these eminent creative achievers to those who did not qualify
as such.
Next, Shelley gave both groups a task that measures how
fast they habituate. To describe the task, consider the follow-
ing scenario: Imagine you take our advice and go for a run.
You enjoy listening to music while you jog, so you put on your
9394
LOOK AGAIN
headphones and play a "get up and move" song list. To monitor
Every five minutes the volume of the music turns down
a notch and a monotonous voice says something like "Dis-
tance: 4.6 miles; average pace: nine minutes and thirty-two
seconds per mile." This happens again and again and again.
The reported distance changes every five minutes, and the
average speed may change too, but the voice is the same, the
tone is the same, the structure of the sentence-the same.
Because of this repetitiveness, many people will stop paying
attention to the information. Their brain filters the highly
predictable voice and fails to register the exact distance and
pace.
Shelley didn't ask people to use a running app, but the task
she used was similar in principle to the scenario above.
First, she played volunteers the same sounds again and
again. Because of habituation, after a few repetitions most
people stopped processing the sound, just as they are likely to
stop registering the utterance generated by their running app.
Next, Shelly introduced a twist. To describe the twist, imagine
that while you are jogging, you meet your friend Joleen. Joleen
is also out on a run, and you decide to jog together.
Joleen does not have a running app, so you promise to
share with her the average speed every five minutes. But your
brain keeps filtering out the app voice, so you fail to report the
speed to Joleen. If you are a "fast habituater" you will do worse;
if you are a "slow habituater," you will do better.
The twist Shelley introduced was similar in principle. She
presented the volunteers with the sounds alongside simple
Creativity: Overcoming the habituation of thought
images (such as a yellow circle) and examined if they learned
associations between the sounds and the images. That is, the
volunteers had to figure out which sound was paired with
which image and in which order. Shelley had some volunteers
(a mix of "creatives" and "noncreatives") complete the associ-
ation problem without being preexposed to the sounds, while
others (a mix of creatives and noncreatives) did the habitua-
tion task first. By comparing the performance of the creatives
who were preexposed to the sounds with the performance of
the creatives who were not preexposed, Shelley could mea-
sure the impact of habitation on the creative group. She did
the same for the noncreatives.
She found that the creatives were less affected by repe-
tition than noncreatives. That is, despite hearing the same
sound over and over, creatives still attended to, and noticed,
the sounds well enough to complete the association task. 14
Does that mean creatives habituate slower? Or maybe
they dishabituate faster when needed? Or maybe both? Shel-
ley's study cannot answer these questions directly. But other
scientists have examined physiological habituation directly,
and they found that more creative people do indeed show less
physiological habituation (as measured by skin conductance
response) to sounds,15 It seems, then, that a failure to habitu-
ate may indeed be related to innovative thinking.
In the previous chapter, we discussed studies that found
a failure to habituate in people with mental health problems.
People suffering from schizophrenia, for example, also show
slow habituation to sounds. Shelley believes that what may
seem like a deficit in some people may end up being an ad-
9596
LOOK AGAIN
vantage in others. Inability to filter out seemingly irrelevant
information can lead to difficulties of various kinds (such as
an inability to focus). But it may also provide the mind with a
large range of information to play around with and recombine
into unusual and original ideas. Shelley thinks the latter is es-
pecially true in people with a high IQ.16 Provide an intelligent
mind with a random mix of seemingly irrelevant information,
and once in while a brilliant new idea will emerge.
OUT OF A RUT
We don't know if Fosbury was a slow habituater, but we do
know that he had access to an unusual mix of information
that was critical for his innovation. A key to Fosbury's success
was that in addition to being an athlete, he was an engineering
student. His knowledge of mechanics enabled him to perfect
the backward jump.
Fosbury developed his unusual jump slowly over two
years, combining engineering theory with physical practice.
First, Fosbury discovered that by arching his back, his center
of gravity would stay below the bar as his body cruised over it.
Second, he completely changed how he approached the bar.
Instead of sprinting forward like everyone else, he sprinted
diagonally. And while the other jumpers took off at the same
spot regardless of the bar's height, Fosbury moved his spot far-
ther away from the bar as it was raised. This trick increased his
"flight time" and was critical for his success.
It was a huge departure from normal; most jumpers took
Creativity: Overcoming the habituation of thought
off about one foot away from the bar, but Fosbury would take
off as far as four feet away to attempt the very high bars. Many
coaches thought that Fosbury was crazy. One of his high
school coaches told another, "He's never going to be a jumper
unless he gives up this god-awful whatever you call it. If we
teach him to straddle, maybe he can score for us at district.
But with this—not gonna happen." 17
New thinking, and real originality, often comes from peo-
ple who are in some sense outsiders-individuals who have
different knowledge or skill sets from others in the field. In law,
some of the most creative work in the last fifty years has come
from the field of economics. Lawyers with economics training,
and economists interested in law, have asked, "If we look at
the law from an economic perspective, how might we think
differently?" It isn't exactly the Fosbury flop, but it produced a
Nobel Prize for Ronald Coase in 1991.
In economics, some of the most creative work in the last
fifty years has come from the field of psychology. Economists
with an interest in psychology, and psychologists interested in
economics, have asked, "If we look at economic questions from
a psychological perspective, what would we do differently?"
That question produced Nobel Prizes for Daniel Kahneman, a
psychologist, in 2002; for Robert Shiller in 2013; and for Rich-
ard Thaler in 2017.
Thaler, probably the most pioneering of behavioral econ-
omists, might well be seen as the Dick Fosbury of the social
sciences. He wasn't especially good at math, so his academic
promise was not exactly terrific; in his own words, "I was only
an average economist with rather modest prospects." At the98
LOOK AGAIN
age of thirty-two, he says, "I decided, come what may, I was
going to pursue the possibility of combining psychology with
economics"I8which put him in a position to invent some-
thing new. In many areas, the Fosburys and Thalers among
us inject ideas from unexpected places into domains where
things have gotten stuck-domains where people are in a rut.
We have all been there-our minds do the same old thing,
day in, day out. It is true of poets, novelists, artists, biologists,
engineers, architects, and musicians. It is true of historians
and screenwriters. It is true of athletes, and it is true of people
in business and government.
Cass can report that bureaucrats often find themselves in
a rut. Public servants who have worked in the same job, day
after day and year after year, tend to be terrific at what they do,
and highly professional, but they sometimes find it difficult to
imagine doing things differently. Because they are habituated
to certain ways of operating, they take long-standing patterns
and practices for granted. This is due not only to risk aversion,
but also to a failure even to consider what risks one might take.
The same often happens in industry. Highly successful
companies get in a rut by continuing on the same path they
have been traveling for a while. In such cases dishabituation
is often triggered by newcomers, who inject new ideas into or-
ganizations not because they are smarter or more creative by
nature, but because they have not yet settled into the usual
patterns. Instead of doing what has always been done, they
look at things sideways or from a distance, or from very differ-
ent starting points.
But flexible thinking need not emerge solely from new-
Creativity: Overcoming the habituation of thought
comers. Organizations can increase creative thought by in-
ducing small changes to routines and environments, just as
Kelly Main and her colleagues did. For example, they may
change employees physical surroundings, encourage employ-
ees to train in fields very different from their own, create di-
verse teams with different kinds of expertise, or ask employees
to rotate through different kinds of jobs. As a result, some may
end up jumping differently.
The problem is that sometimes the rest of the field is not
ready for the innovation. Most high jumpers were at first skep-
tical of Fosbury's backward jump and tried to persuade him to
align himself with the norm. But all that changed during the
U.S. trials for the 1968 Olympics. Using his unusual technique,
Fosbury did relatively well, but he was still only in fourth place
as the bar was raised to 2.2 meters. He had to place at least
third to make the team. Ed Caruthers, one of Fosbury's com-
petitors, cleared the bar on his first try. Then Reynaldo Brown
did the same. But John Hartfield, who was leading the compe-
tition until that point, failed all three of his attempts. All Fos-
bury had to do to get to the 1968 Olympics in Mexico City was
to clear that bar, and he did. 1º
The rest is history. Fosbury competed in the 1968 Olympics
in the high jump. He did not just win the gold medal; he set the
Olympic record, with a jump of seven feet, four inches. He did
so not just by jumping better, but by jumping differently. Once
Fosbury proved to the world the superiority of his technique,
the field followed. By the next Olympics in 1972, twenty-eight
of the forty jumpers used the Fosbury flop. 20
With that, Fosbury essentially lost his advantage. The se-
99100
LOOK AGAIN
cret of his success was not his muscles or speed. It was his
mind. But once his innovation was known to all, those with
better physical abilities took his place on the podium. Fos-
bury never made it to a second Olympics, but his invention
certainly did. Today, seeing athletes jump backward is the
norm-something to which fans of the sport have all habit-
uated.
In 1988, two decades after Fosbury won Olympic gold, a
high school coach, just for fun, demonstrated the straddle
method, which had dominated the sport for so long. One of
his jumpers responded, "What in the world is that?" Another
exclaimed, "Now that is goofy!"??
In high-jumping as well as elsewhere, the intriguing ques-
tion now is: What will be the next big flop?
LYING:
HOW TO KEEP YOUR CHILD FROM
GROWING A LONG NOSE
It starts out with you taking a little bit, maybe
a few hundred, a few thousand. You get
comfortable with that, and before you know it,
it snowballs into something big.
-BERNARD MADOFF!
ALI HAS A SON named Leo. When Leo was three weeks old,
sleeps through the night!" she explained to the bewildered doc-
tor, who did not seem at all alarmed. "Babies are not supposed to
be so calm, she tried. "His sister used to scream all night."
The kind doctor had other crises to manage, but to put Tali
at ease, the doctor examined Leo. First, she took his tempera-
ture and listened to his heart--all normal. Next, she tested his
pupils— they were the perfect size and shape. She checked his
hearing and Moro reflex-all intact.
101