ALSO BY DAN HEATH
Upstream: The Quest to Solve Problems Before They Happen
RES
How to Change What's
ALSO BY CHIP AND DAN HEATH
Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die
Switch: How to Change Things When Change Is Hard
Decisive: How to Make Better Choices in Life and Work
The Power of Moments: Why Certain Experiences
Have Extraordinary Impact
Dan He
AVID READER
New York
Amsterdam/Antwerp London38
RESET
Recommendations (find live links at danheath.com/reset-links):
If you need help picking the right boulder-i.e., knowing what to focus on
in your work-then I'd recommend the thoughtful and practical Bulletproof
Problem Solving by Charles Conn and Robert McLean. Rory Sutherland of-
fers an insightful take on potential solutions we overlook because we don't
think deep enough about the psychological goals of what we're building.
His Eurostar example, mentioned briefly in this chapter, comes around minute
six. Linda Metcalf literally wrote the book on the Miracle Question, a step-
by-step guide to seeing your way quickly through confounding situations to
meaningful and lasting change. Its primary focus is on personal relationships,
but it also includes some advice on how to build more effective connections
within the workplace. If the truck-buying story inspired you to think more care-
fully about how to set the right goals, check out this paper called Goals Gone
Wild (and an accompanying Q & A). When goals go wrong, they can go
very wrong.
3
STUDY THE BRIGI
>> You can Find Leverage
analyzing your own besSTUDY THE BRIG
In 1926, US military leaders were desig
for the first time. The bodies of hundre
measured, and the average of those r
designs for the size and shape of the ses
windshield.
For decades, that standard design endu
time for an update. Gilbert S. Daniels, a 23
part of the core redesign team. This time,
4,000 pilots, studying 140 separate dim
Crotch height. Span from eye to ear.
The idea was that with more precise s
gonomic cockpit could be created, which v
performance and fewer crashes. Or so it w
skeptical. Were the "average" dimensions
ation? How many pilots were average?
Daniels combed through the data. H42
RESET
dimensions in particular-including height and sleeve length-that
were thought to be critical for designing cockpits. For each dimen-
sion, he computed the average. For height, it was 5'9". Then he
broadened the average to include everyone who was in the middle
30% of the distribution. So, with height, the 30% middle range
included all pilots between 5'7" and 5'11".
Daniels asked himself, how many pilots were in the middle
range on all 10 dimensions?
Here's what Daniels found, according to Todd Rose, who tells
the story in his fascinating book The End of Average:
... even Daniels was stunned when he tabulated the actual
number.
Zero.
Out of 4,063 pilots, not a single airman fit within the av-
erage range on all ten dimensions. One pilot might have a
longer-than-average arm length, but a shorter-than-average
leg length. Another pilot might have a big chest but small hips.
Even more astonishing, Daniels discovered that if you picked
out just three of the ten dimensions of size-say, neck circum-
ference, thigh circumference, and wrist circumference-less
than 3.5 percent of pilots would be average sized on all three
dimensions. Daniels's findings were clear and incontrovertible.
There was no such thing as an average pilot. If you've designed a
cockpit to fit the average pilot, you've actually designed it to
fit no one.
The air force's leaders, to their credit, took this finding seri-
ously. They abandoned the idea of tailoring the cockpit to an
STL
"average pilot." Instead, they asked airp
create an adjustable environment; one th
pilots whose measurements spanned almo
possibilities: from the 5th to the 95th per
sion.
The manufacturers squawked. Such cust
expensive! Too slow! Eventually, though, th
ness leaders do when confronted with losin
ders: They caved. And they figured it out.
Suddenly, everything could be tweaked.
Adjustable seats. Adjustable helmet straps. /
the individual pilot. As a result, pilot perf
years afterward.
Like the air force, you need to rebel against
oversee their organizations using averages a
enue is an aggregation. Profit margin is an a
Score is an average.
Averages are great for monitoring but ter
erages can tell us: Something's wrong. But th
what's wrong, or how to fix it.
To Find a Leverage Point, we must pi
Disaggregate our rolled-up numbers. Diser
people and products and customers that toge
ganizations.
What we're looking for, in this chapter, is
cific: Within the context of your goal, when I
best? Let's call those unusually positive dat:44
RESET
spots," a term my brother Chip and I used in our book Switch.* In
the context of employee engagement, your bright spots would be
your most engaged employees. In the context of corporate train-
ing, your bright spots would be the most effective or highly rated
events. In the context of your own efforts to cut back on sweets,
your bright spots would be the days you managed to avoid eating a
brownie in the afternoon.
Bright spots make great Leverage Points because you know
they're possible. If you've done something once, you can probably
do it again.
But bright spots are typically buried in averages, so they are not
self-evident. You've got to excavate them. That was Ken Davis's
mission when, in 2009, he was asked to handle a crisis: a plunge in
customer retention caused by the Great Recession. Davis worked
at Gartner, the public research and consulting firm, and one of the
company's key businesses involved selling market research sub-
scriptions to corporate clients. In the aftermath of the economic
crisis, as clients looked for places to trim expenses, costly research
subscriptions looked like a tempting place to start.
For a subscription business, retention is the single most impor-
tant measure of health. Do your customers want to keep buying what
you're selling? And Gartner's customers were increasingly saying
"no." By the middle of 2009, the wallet retention rate had dropped
*Switch focuses on behavior change, while this book is aimed more at
the systems level (operations and strategy). But they're definitely birds of a
feather! The most direct intersection between the two books is the focus on
"bright spots." There's a full chapter on ihe topic in Switch, too, with all dif-
ferent material (don't miss the story of child malnutrition in Vietnam) and a
greater emphasis on the psychology of why we obsess more about problems
than about successes. If you like this book, you're likely to like Switch, too. And
if you don't like it, it's definitely Chip's fault.
STUD
to about 84%. Meaning: For every $100 in
had sold in 2008, they were averaging $84 in
The people in charge of retention at Gart
partners," and Davis's first move, after takin
to go and see the work. As he learned more ab
and their work, he was struck by the disjunct
activities. The #1 goal of the group was to n
much of their time was spent doing ancillai
orders, collaborating with salespeople on s
more.
"A big part of my initial work was 'clearir
tractions," said Davis. "We needed to focus
economic driver and literally drop everything
this theme later in chapter 8, Do less AND m
In the next stage of his work, he dug in
who had renewed and clients who had churi
quickly: Those clients who regularly used th
more likely to renew.
Obvious, perhaps. But the next insight wa
came from untangling averages.
Let's start with the graph below. The bai
number of client partners who achieved differ
40-
20
100+
90-49
80-89 70-79-60-6950-5
RETENTION46
RESET
The vast majority of client partners (namely, everyone below 100%)
were losing money, relative to the previous year:
Despite the (abundant) bad news contained in the chart, Davis's
attention was drawn to the far left of the graph:
40
30
20
10
*
100+
90-99-80-89
20-29
RETENTION %
This was extraordinary: There were 17 client partners who had
100% or better wallet retention. (To go over 100% would mean that
the accounts they managed spent more money this year than last
year-a sign of a healthy business.) This was outstanding perfor-
mance in the face of a recession. What were these high-performing
client partners doing that was different from all the others?
Ken Davis launched a study of his team's bright spots. He be-
lieved that there must be differences in behavior underlying their
differences in performance. Davis and his colleagues started asking
the client partners some basic questions about how they managed
their day: How do you set up your calendar? How do you plan your
week? How do you take notes? How do you prepare for a call? And
so on.
Using these conversations, Davis and his team assembled a laun-
dry list of common practices. Once these common practices had
been compiled, Davis surveyed each client partner about their own
STUDY
behavior. Here's a list of practices that your collea
YOU use?
Armed with those survey results, Davis
the question: What are my A performers do
my F performers? As an example, consider ti
"follow-up process": getting back to clients y
information that they requested on a call.
Here's the percentage of A and F performer
that practice:
Follow-up process
73°
What do these numbers tell us? In a nutshe
a follow-up process is not what distinguishe
from the bottom, because both groups follow
numbers.
By contrast, check out this finding:
Defined daily process
That's a huge gap. Almost all the As used
cess" and only a third of the Es did. And wi
"defined daily process"? It's basically thought
One example from an A performer: "I reach48
RESET
a week. I use Monday as a call-out day and prioritize my call-outs
based on renewal dates."*
As a result of this bright-spots work, Davis unlocked the second
big insight: Client partners had demonstrated radically different
success rates at getting their clients to use their subscriptions, which was
the single biggest factor in determining whether they ultimately
renewed.
So a behavior like "defined daily process" (I) allowed the client
partner to make more client calls, and those calls (2) encouraged
clients to use their subscriptions more, which (3) boosted their odds
of renewing. That was the logic of success.
In all, a set of nine specific behaviors seemed to separate the
top performers from the worst. By studying the bright spots, Davis
had uncovered a credible explanation for the difference in perfor-
mance.
So his next move was to get his full team to push harder on those
Leverage Points. The bright-spot partners trained the whole team
on what they were doing. Here's how I set up my calendar: Here's how
I keep tabs on what my clients' business priorities are.
As a result, the B, C, D, and F client partners started getting
better. It wasn't mysterious what was driving better performance,
it was an identifiable set of behaviors, and the client partners could
practice and master them.
*Notice there's a natural link between finding bright spots and then going
and seeing the work. You identify a bright spot in the data, then you go study
it. The reason the latter is so important is that bright spots (in this case, great cli-
ent partners) don't always know why they are bright spots. They're just doing
what seems right to them (just as the underperformers are doing what seems
right to them, too). It takes observation to identify the practices that are making
them excel.
STUI
The results of this work were stunning. 7
began, Gartner had its best-ever level of ret
Then, in the second year, the retention n
And again in the third year and the fourth. F
retention number kept hitting greater and g
Every year, they ran the same game p
bright spots from the year prior, identified ti
and spread those practices to the full tean
the whole team to achieve the level of perfo
spots had achieved the previous year.
A rough estimate is that Gartner's reven
$100 million as a result of this relentless fo
averages. Pretty astonishing results from j
people at their best.
3.
By studying bright spots, we can identify
allow us to succeed. And if we understand t
can replicate them, allowing our success to
lyze bright spots on any level: bright spots i
spots in a team, bright spots among differe
*The success was mostly but not exclusively due to
example, there was the matter of the extreme unc
attitude was: If you're willing to learn, we want ›
were a few people who weren't willing to try. Davi
balked at the idea of trying to increase her numbe
think of herself as someone who served clients. Sh
"strategic planner." As Davis told me,
"If you wan
to change the people... or change the people." TI
had to find another job.50
RESET
organization, or even bright spots across different organizations
doing similar kinds of work.
Kate Hurley adopted that last approach in her quest to improve
animal shelters. Hurley was a veterinarian and the first person in
the world to do a residency in the new field of shelter medicine,
which is devoted to studying shelters as a "system" with multiple
goals: Keeping animals healthy. Reducing euthanasia. Ensuring the
health of the animal population within the community.
In one of her first consulting assignments, Hurley and a fel-
low shelter-medicine expert named Julie Levy worked with the
city shelter in Jacksonville, Florida. The shelter was dangerously
overpopulated. Only 1 cat in 10 was leaving the shelter alive—
the remainder were either euthanized or died from diseases that
spread like wildfire through the overcrowded facility. "It was spi-
raling downward," said the shelter director, Ebenezer Gujjarla-
pudi. "We were running out of room. There was disease and rats.
We were having to kill a lot of small kittens because they were
getting sick."
The shelter workers were unhappy, ground down by the relent-
less cycle of euthanasia. Keep in mind: These are animal people!
In a cruel irony, their jobs demanded that they put down animals.
"You start getting angry," Gujjarlapudi said. "Or you begin to lose
hope."
Hurley empathized with them: In her days as an animal con-
trol officer, she'd had to handle the euthanasia, too. It was one of
the experiences that had sparked her interest in shelter medicine
reassessing shelters from a systems perspective.
In the midst of this Jacksonville dystopia emerged an idea so big
and so effective that it would come to transform the world of shel-
ters. The idea came from Gujjarlapudi, the person who had hired
Hurley and Levy to consult. He was actually new to shelters: As
STU
head of another city department, he'd rec
overseeing animal care and control in Jacks
what he didn't know. But that ignorance we
nius.
To understand his idea, we first have to 1
of TNR: trap, neuter, return. As Hurley exp
you've got some cats living in your alley. Yo
ing a million babies. You don't want the m
on your car. In most communities, there's a
can trap the cat and then bring it to a clini
it, vaccinate it for rabies and other cat infect
its ear so other veterinarians will know it's b
put it back." In most communities TNR was
not by the shelters, whose goal was to find
through adoption.
So let's get back to Gujjarlapudi, who was
facility where 9 out of 10 incoming cats u
saw that some of the cats coming into the s
When he brought this up with the TNR cli
the clipped ears meant and asked whether ti
back, thereby taking them off Gujjarlapudi
released them once—-might as well try it ag
Then Gujjarlapudi asked a fateful follov
to take some of these other cats who aren't ear
your TVR thing and release them, and that u
thanized.
The TNR clinic said, Sure, we'll take 'em
This was the heretical moment. Becau
turn" cats to the community. They held c
them a warm, adoptive family. That was ti
reality was that many, if not most, shelter52
RESET
that most cats had no hope of being adopted. What if, instead, the
cats were just treated and put back into the community?
Because not all cats were house pets. Many were feral. Others
were "neighborhood cats," living outside and making a daily circuit
among many different homes. They didn't need adoptive homes to
survive! They were doing fine on their own. Maybe all they needed
was to be vaccinated and sterilized-and then released.
Hurley realized immediately the near-magical power of the so-
lution. "It was a total holy sh** moment," she said. "It was just in a
flash that I saw: Oh, this entire system that we've been burdened by
for 100 years—it was built on a fundamental premise that was never
questioned until this guy who didn't know any better asked, 'Could
you just put them back?'"
"Return to field"-the name for what Gujjarlapudi had pro-
posed-addressed so many problems at once. Once sterilized, the
cats wouldn't contribute to overpopulation. Once vaccinated, they
wouldn't spread disease. Once released from the shelter, they wouldn't
clog up space and staff time, meaning that the remaining cats were
healthier and better cared for and more likely to be adopted.
The shelter staffers were thrilled because they spent less time
euthanizing cats and more time placing animals with families. "The
staff now had a little breathing room," Gujjarlapudi said. "They're
thinking, Wow, what else can we do?"
Best of all, those cats who weren't likely candidates for adop-
tion—-the ones who would have ended up euthanized- got to keep
living.
The obvious objection to this approach-expressed by many
animal control officers—was, Wait just a darn minute—the commu-
nity is going to be overrun by cats! Hundreds of cats that previously
were being caged or euthanized would now be set free. It would be
pandemonium.
STUDY T
But it didn't happen. According to Hurley, ‹
spaying and neutering changes the cats' beha
immediately become fat and lazy and calm ther
Hurley. "They become better citizens of the cor
if there were more cats around, they were cool
makers.
Another factor at play here is more subtle
Could return to field actually lower the total por
That sounds absurd. How could you releas
community and see the population numbers dec
ing water into a cup and seeing the volume of li
The answer, according to Hurley, relates to
pacity" of the community. Think of carrying
bank, the sum of all the food available to feed
mice and birds to bowls of kibbles left outside
That food bank is not infinite. It can support s
of animals.
What happens when a cat (from among tha
caged or euthanized? It opens up a spot at the l
the cat away, but you left the food there, guara
other cat there who's just going to have twice as
Hurley. And then— this is the crucial part-thos
buffet will have litters of kittens. "That's how li
mals work—they have offspring in direct propo
food is available."
But when the food bank is being gobbled up
tered cats, it crowds out cats who otherwise n
ters. Consider what happened in San Jose, Ca
local shelter became the first to adopt return
*I'm not sure whether I would have the same response.54
RESET
Jacksonville's experience. The shelter returned about 10,000 cats
to the field. Many skeptics feared an endless revolving door of cats
coming in and out.
But, no, the rate of cats coming into the shelter went down by
30%.*
Hurley knew she'd found her Leverage Point: something do-
able and worth doing. Something capable of moving the boulder
of mass euthanasia. And she had located that Leverage Point by
scanning the environment for bright spots. Notice the pattern of
thought:
What's the problem? Cats being killed in overcrowded shelters.
Where is that problem NOT happening? (l.e., what are the bright
spots?) There's a bright spot in Jacksonville, where the shelter
director embraced the idea of return to field.
Is that situation fundamentally different from other situations where
it might be used? (ln other words, is there a reason to think it would
ONLY work in Jacksonville?) No, the dynamics in the Jackson-
ville shelter were familiar and widespread.
Okay then, let's replicate the bright spot!
*By the way, I want to acknowledge that TNR has become controversial in the
birder community because cats eat birds. That part, at least, is indisputable.
So people who love birds say, "You're releasing more cats-that's necessarily
gonna mean more birds die." Hurley's counterargument (as you read above)
is that return to field shrinks the cat population. The birders don't buy that ar-
gument: "Cats are a highly destructive invasive species that should not be
allowed to live outdoors at all" was the stance articulated in one New York
Times arlicle. It's all complicated and mostly I want to stay out of this debate
because I'm a dog person.
STUDY T
Hurley shared her findings with a group o
Northern California. Everyone in the room sha
ing cats' lives. So Hurley laid out five strategies
that goal, a key one being "return to field." But
just giving a presentation. She wanted a commi
thing.
She pulled out a yellow legal pad and challe
to write down three bits of information: Their
ter. And the number of cats' lives that they wou
six months, by adopting the bright-spot practic
When Hurley tallied up the number, she found t
mitted to save over 1,300 cats.
The new practices were more successful than
had anticipated. One group, which had pledged
15 cats, found that after a year it had saved 900.1
needed to think bigger.
By late 2014, Hurley and her partner Levy w
the Million Cat Challenge, an effort to scale the
to shelters across the United States. The Challer
million cats by the end of 2019.
Not ambitious enough, as it turned out. T
champions exceeded this goal easily. They had
cats one full year ahead of schedule.
By spring 2024, the number had rocketed
lion cats. The campaign had been propelled by
emerged almost by accident. It had been an idea
director who didn't know enough to know that h
gesting it. An idea that ended up revolutionizir
the power of a well-chosen Leverage Point.
In 2019, Hurley got an email from a shelter
joined the campaign. The email said, "We've r56 RESET
we've never had before ... Our shelter has 49 full bottles of Fatal-
Plus which haven't been used and are at the end of their expiration
date. How great is that problem to have?!"
Fatal-Plus is the trade name for the euthanasia solution used in
shelters.
It wasn't needed anymore.
STUDY
Whirlwind review: Chapter 3, Study the Brig
1. The third way to identity Leverage Points is to stuc
most successful efforts. If you analyze what alle
those occasions, you can scale that success.
2. Averages are great for simple monitoring but terr
want to spot Leverage Points, you must untangle o
a. The air force found that there was no such thin
They needed cockpits that could be tailored to
3. Often the way to unlock forward progress is to
people or projects or performance.
a. At Gartner, Ken Davis was facing a sharp drop
than agonizing about what wasn't working, h
client partners.
b. Davis was able to isolate specific practices th
fined daily process." Those practices were l
could direct his whole team toward them.
4. You can analyze bright spots on any level: brig
bright spots in a team, bright spots among diffe
organization, or even bright spots across differ
similar kinds of work.
a. Kate Hurley, in consulting with animal shelters,
the notion of "return to field." It became a critic
ing the lives of millions of cats.
5. Finding Leverage Points can be a needle-in-a-ha
age Points might seem promising but prove impos
different-you know you can succeed, because
you do it more?)58
RESET
Recommendations (find live links at danheath.com/reset-links):
I learned about the US Air Force's cockpit study from Todd Rose's fascinating
book The End of Average. Rose, who headed the Mind, Brain, and Educa-
tion program at Harvard, breaks down the myth of measuring individuals
against the average in schools and at work. He's really good at showing how
there are usually multiple pathways to success: the three approaches children
take when learning to read, the seven distinct routes to career success, and
others. For a more psychological take on change, including a closer look
at the power of bright-spots thinking, check out Switch, by my brother Chip
and me. For even more on bright spots-especially for social-sector work-
see The Power of Positive Deviance by Richard Pascale, Jerry Sternin, and
Monique Sternin. ("Positive deviance" = bright-spots thinking.) If you're a
cat person-or simply interested in learning more about how a pair of vets
managed to save millions of cats-check out the Unleashing Social Change
podcast episode with Kate Hurley as a guest. For a master class on how
Hurley approached fixes for overcrowding in shelters, watch her virtual lec-
ture hosted by the San Diego Humane Society. Or, to learn more about the
five lifesaving strategies used in the Million Cat Challenge, check out the
resources section of the campaign's website. (As a teaser, one strategy was
"managed admission," which was basically a way of relieving bottlenecks,
a topic we will explore in the next chapter.)
4
TARGET THE CON.
>> You can Find Leverage Points
the #1 force that is holding y