*Timely and important. A clear and provocative book about the
power of expectation and the endless mystery of the human mind."
-Tara Westover, #1 New York Times
bestselling author of Educated
*A sensational guide to a more psychologically rich life."
-Angela Duckworth, New York Times
bestselling author of Grit
*In Look Again, Sharot and Sunstein offer an insightful look into
the science of habituation. Their insights into the why and how of
getting used to things teach us how to hack habituation to bring
more joy to our lives. A surprising and delightful book."
—Annie Duke, bestselling author of Thinking in Bets
*Look Again is the perfect book to help you refresh your point
of view. Sharot and Sunstein reveal why it's easy to be lulled into
complacency about anything and how to prevent falling into
this trap. In the bargain, they'll help you live a happier, healthier,
wiser, and more just life."
-Katy Milkman, bestselling author of How to Change
"Such a vivid, human, and original book-the perfect guide to "
perking up everything from your creativity to your love life."
-Tim Harford, author of How to Make the World Add Up
"Look Again is a fascinating guide to how and why our biased
minds get used to stuff and how we can fight through our usual
adaptations. It's a must-read for anyone who wants to feel happier,
stay more present, and make healthier, more effective decisions."
-Laurie Santos, Chandrika and Ranjan Tandon
Professor of Psychology at Yale University and
host of The Happiness Lab podcast
LOO
AGAI
THE POWER OF NC
WHAT WAS ALWAY
Tali Sharot ar
Cass R. Sunste
ONE SIGNAL
PUBLISHERS
ATRIA
New York • Amsterdam/Antwerp • London • TorontoINTRODUCTIO
HOW WE HABITUA
EVERYTHING, ALL THI
Habituation. It may be as fundan
characteristic of life as DN
-VINCENT GASTON DETHIE
/HAT WAS THE BEST day of your lif
it difficult to select the very best d
choose a really good day.
Some people think back to their wedding
the day a child was born or their graduatio
more idiosyncratic answers: "The day I brea
Labrador Retriever on the roof" or "The da
about the fear of public speaking." As long as
it qualifies.
Envision reliving that day. The sun is out; t
are running on the beach in your yellow bathi
the sky is dark; the snow is falling; you warm yotLOOK AGAIN
that of a newfound love. Whatever it is-it's joyful. Now imagine
reliving that day. Again. And again. And again. And again. You are
trapped in a "best day of my life" loop. What will happen?
What will happen is that the best day of your life will become
less exciting, less joyful, less fun, and less meaningful. Soon the
best day of your life will become tedious. The sun will not feel as
warm, the snow not as magical, your love not so perfect, your
accomplishments not as great, and your mentors not as wise.
What is thrilling on Monday becomes boring by Friday. We
habituate, which means that we respond less and less to stim-
uli that repeat? That's human nature. Even those things that
you once found exhilarating (a relationship, a job, a song, a
work of art) lose their sparkle after a while. Studies show that
people even start habituating to the magic of a tropical vaca-
tion within forty-three hours of arrival.3
But what if you could restore your sense of amazement
about those things that you no longer feel or notice? What if
you could, to some extent, dishabituate?
That's what this book is about. We will ask what could hap-
pen if people were able to overcome habituation in the office,
in the bedroom, or on the athletic field. What would be the im-
pact on happiness, relationships, work, community? And how
would you go about doing that? We will see how temporarily
changing your environment, changing the rules, changing the
people with whom you interact, and taking real or imagined
mini-breaks from ordinary life can help you regain sensitivity
and start noticing what you barely see.
We won't look only at how you can dishabituate to the best
things, such as a terrific job, home, neighborhood, or relation-
Introduction: How we habituate to ever
ship. We will also explore how you can di
things. Now, you may think that is a drea
you want to experience terrible things a
If we made you experience the worst day
over and over, surely you would want a b
You would want the pain of misery or h
over time. That would be a blessing
Fair enough, but here is the problem.
to the bad things, we are less motivated
That Tuesday's nightmare is Sunday's sn
ous challenge for fighting foolishness, crue
corruption, discrimination, misinformatic
bituation to what is bad can lead us to tal
risks, to fail to notice gradual changes is
havior that should raise concerns, to allow
romantic relationships to grow larger and
being bothered by stupidity or inefficiency
So we will explore what happens wher
only to the good, but also to the bad, and h
We will travel to Sweden, where switching
on which people drive led to a temporary d
mately 40 percent in accidents, partly becal
uation. We will see how clean-air chamber
notice (and therefore care about) pollution,
someone else's shoes can help us dishabiti
tion, and how taking breaks from social med
preciate your life again." We will examine ho
anew, or from the side, can produce startling
But before we dive into all that, let's co4
LOOK AGAIN
so quick to habituate to everything all the time. (Well, almost
everything, and almost all the time. We'll get to that.) We will
consider why we have evolved a brain that is wired to want
things (a fancy car, a big house, a loving spouse, a high-paying
job), but then quick to overlook those things when we finally
get them. We will ask why, despite being sophisticated crea-
tures, we are relatively quick to accept dreadful things that
become the norm, such as cruelty, corruption, and discrimi-
nation. To resolve these puzzles, we will use ideas and work
from psychology, neuroscience, economics, and philosophy-
some from our own research, some from others.
Why are we quick to habituate? The answer is not that
we are weak, ungrateful, or overwhelmed beings who do not
appreciate threats and wonders. The answer has to do with a
basic characteristic that we, two-legged, big-headed creatures,
share with every other animal on earth, including apes, dogs,
birds, frogs, fish, rats, and even bacteria.
HOW IT STARTED . . . WHERE IT'S GOING
More than 3 billion years ago, your ancestors appeared on
earth.? But you would not know it by looking at them. The
resemblance is not apparent. They were smaller in size and
less cultured. Fortunately, they were sophisticated enough
to survive rough conditions. They did not have legs, but they
could swim and tumble along in search of nutrient-rich en-
vironments. Yet even these primitive actions exhibited the
hallmarks of habituation: when the level of nutrients in the
Introduction: How we habituate to ever
environment was constant, your ancesto
stant rate on a kind of autopilot. Only w
trients changed did the frequency of thei
Who were these early creatures? They
teria. As their name suggests, they were co
gle cell. In comparison, you have 37.2 trilli
These cells interact, enabling you not only
but also to run, jump, laugh, sing, and shor
even a single cell can habituate by inhibiti
Many years after unicellular organism
simple multicellular organisms emerged. ]
neurons that can "talk" to each other. The
will talk changes over time. After one nei
message to another neuron-perhaps a
veying information about a stinky odor to
will often reduce the frequency of its sign:
still present, 10 As a result, behavioral resp
ments away from that odor, reduce.
These processes happen in the huma
one reason you may stop noticing the sn
a few minutes in a smoke-filled room, an
amazed to find yourself getting used to bar
at first, greatly irritated you.
To demonstrate this basic principle, le
to Vienna, Austria, in 1804. A twenty-four
sician, Ignaz Paul Vital Troxler, was study
made an astonishing discovery." He notice
eyes on an image for long enough at close
to disappear. Try it yourself. Locate the co6
LOOK AGAIN
back cover of this book (it is a rectangle with a black point in
its center). Fix your eyes on the black cross without moving
them for about thirty seconds. The colorful clouds will soon
disappear and turn into gray nothingness.
This happens because your brain stops responding to things
that don't change." Once you move your eyes, you will immedi-
ately regain awareness of the colors. You see them again. By mov-
ing your eyes, you are changing the inputs your brain receives.
Of course, it's not only constant rainbow clouds that your brain
stops noticing. Over time, you stop feeling the socks on your
feet or hearing the persistent buzz of an air conditioner. (Per-
haps you aren't noticing some background noise right now?)
You get used to much more complex circumstances too
(such as wealth, poverty, power, risk, marriage, and discrimi-
nation), and this type of habituation involves active inhibition
between different neurons. 3 For example, imagine that your
neighbor, Ms. Wheeler, got a new dog, a German Shepherd
named Finley. Finley barks a lot. At first the barks are surpris-
ing: you notice each one. But after a while your brain creates
a "model" (that is an internal representation) of the situation
("Whenever I pass by Ms. Wheeler's house, Finley will bark"). 1*
You anticipate the bark. When you experience it ("Finley
barks"), your brain compares the experience to the model
("Whenever I pass by Ms. Wheeler's house, Finley will bark").
If the experience matches the model, your response (neural,
emotional, behavioral) is inhibited.
* In this case it is also possible that your photoreceptors stopped responding to
the image.
Introduction: How we habituate to ever
With more and more experiences of
internal model becomes increasingly pr
match the actual experience of hearing
ter the match, the more your response is
match is not identical (for example, the
softer, or angrier, or jumps over the fence
rection), you will be surprised, and your
inhibited.
Let's try this ourselves. Look at the ph
If you are like most people, you were p
the photo at first. You might have felt ur
even afraid for a second or two. But as long
jump off the page and sink its sharp teeth
neck, your brain will respond less and less t
raging eyes. Is As a result, the uneasy feel
disappear. You have become habituated. (
happens if you encounter someone with a8
LOOK AGAIN
appearance. At first, you will notice it and perhaps be preoc-
cupied by it; after a while, you might be startled to see that it
barely registers.)
Your brain seems to have evolved different mechanisms,
from those involving a single cell to those involving more com-
plex neural systems, that obey the same overarching principle.
The principle is simple: when something surprising or unex-
pected happens, your brain will respond strongly. But when
everything is predictable, your brain will respond less, and
sometimes not at all. Like the front page of a daily newspaper,
your brain cares about what recently changed, not about what
remained the same. This is because to survive, your brain
must prioritize what is new and different: the sudden smell
of smoke, a ravenous lion running your way, or an attractive
potential mate passing by. To make the new and unexpected
stand out, your brain filters out the old and expected.
In the chapters that follow, we will see how knowledge of
how your brain works can help you to identify ways to revel
in the good things to which you have habituated, so that phe-
nomenal features of your life may "resparkle" as well as ways
to focus on, and seek to change, the bad things you no longer
notice, including your own bad habits. We will consider health,
safety, and the environment, exploring how you can perceive
serious risks to which you have become accustomed. We will
show how becoming aware that your brain responds less to
repeated stimuli can help make you resilient in the face of re-
petitive misinformation from others and help you address the
chronic stress and distraction that social media triggers. We
will show how habituation and dishabituation offer lessons for
Introduction: How we habituate to ever
business-about what keeps employees
tomers engaged. We will also consider ho
gender and racial discrimination and eve
of fascism, until "dishabituation entrepr
combat the norms-make them salient.
All that being said, habituation is c
helps us adapt quickly to our environme
unable to habituate (for example, to physi
ity can cause great suffering. Some people
habituate than others. We will see how s
lead to a range of mental health problems
insight and extraordinary innovation (in l
the arts).
We hope that what follows will help yc
gray scale, to see colors again.