In Search of
Deeper Learning
THE QUEST TO REMAKE THE
AMERICAN HIGH SCHOOL
Jal Mehta AND Sarah Fine
HI
III
Harvard University Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England 2019(тее
Contents
Introduction
I
1 The State of Deeper Learning in American
High Schools
IO
2
The Progressive Frontier: Project-Based Learning
45
No Excuses Schools: Benefits and Tradeoffs
4 International Baccalaureate: A System
for Deeper Learning?
I57
5
The Comprehensive High School:
Performance versus Learning
I0б
Deeper Learning at the Margins: - Atkeatizeship
Why the Periphery Is More Vital than the Core
252
7 Deeper Teaching: Rigor, Joy, and Apprenticeship 308
8
Mastery, Identity, Creativity, and the
Future of Schooling
362
APPENDIX: METHODOLOGY
NOTES
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
INDEX
403
4I5
44I
447Introduction
IT WASN'T UNTIL we stepped outside for a mid-afternoon break that the
doubts became too serious to ignore.
On the surface, all was well. Our flights were on time. The West Coast
weather was sunny and warm-a welcome respite from the New England
winter. Adults and adolescents at Inspire Academy (a pseudonym) were
gracious.' Leaders took the time to talk with us; teachers welcomed us;
students didn't balk when we joined them at lunch. When we said that we
had come to Inspire as part of our research on how American high schools
could create powerful learning experiences for more students more of
the time, people nodded knowingly. Their school, they told us, was leading
the charge on that front-using project-based learning to support
students in developing both deep academic knowledge and "twenty-
first century skills" such as collaboration and creative problem-solving.
By the middle of the second day, however, it was clear to both of us
that something wasn't right. Despite the time and effort that had gone
into choosing Inspire as a site for our research, it was becoming hard to
shake the thought that we had picked the wrong place. In a tenth-grade
English class, students slumped their way through a scene from Othello,
reading out loud only when threatened with detention and spending much
of the period filling out a worksheet that told them to summarize what
they had read. In an eleventh-grade biology course, students spent thirty
minutes passively listening as their teacher read out the directions for a
I2
INTRODUCTION
highly structured experiment, the outcome of which everybody already
knew. In a ninth-grade social studies class, a young teacher shouted over
her students' side conversations, her voice increasingly shrill. When we
asked students why they were doing what they were doing, their most
common answers were "I don't know," "because the teacher told us to,"
or, in one memorable instance,
, "ask that girl over there-she's the one who
knows what's going on in this class."
There was one bright spot. In Ms. Ortiz's eleventh-grade English class-
room, tucked away in an upstairs corner of Inspire's sprawling building,
students had spent a month reading and analyzing Kate Chopin's The
Awakening. Now, drawing on the themes from the novel, they were
working on a project that asked them to use original art to challenge narra-
tives they found oppressive. The room hummed with purposeful activity.
Some students clustered around tables, immersed in their creations, while
others worked on the accompanying written analyses. When we asked
them to discuss their work, they did so thoughtfully and articulately, ex-
plaining how, unlike Chopin's protagonist, who saw suicide as the only
escape from society's expectations, they were using art to challenge the
narratives they saw as constraining. Next week, they would exhibit and
explain these creations to an audience of peers and teachers.
As we sat on a patch of grass near the school's front entrance, we com-
pared notes and tried to work through the questions that were bubbling
up. Why were there such gaps between Inspire's espoused values and its
enacted
practices? How could a school that had been recommended as
a leader in the field-in foundation-commissioned case studies and by
many educators and reformers-so dimly resemble its reputation? How
did Ms. Ortiz learn to do what she did, and why was Inspire unable to
spread such effective practices to more of its teachers? Was Inspire really
among the best the United States had to offer when it came to engaging
underserved high school students in powerful learning experiences? If it
was, what did that say about our project-and about our field?
These were not the questions that had brought us to Inspire. We began
2010 in an optimistic frame of mind, having secured a small grant to
study a range of successful American public high schools—-particularly,
but not exclusively, those serving disadvantaged students—and try to
understand what made them tick. In an era when standardized testingTION
cady
over
1 we
nost
to,"
who
lass-
ting,
The
vere
arra-
vity.
chile
sked
, ex-
only
÷ the
and
com-
sling
d its
ed as
d by
How
le to
eally
ging
? If it
egan
nt to
larly,
ry to
sting
INTRODUCTION
3
reigned supreme, we wished to question the logic that labeled "good"
schools as those whose students did well on tests, and instead study
places that were not merely achieving academic minimums but helping
students to flourish- to think critically, to become engaged in their
learning, and, in a variety of ways, to prepare for the demands of twenty-
first-century life.
Since we suspected that the answers to these questions might be mul-
tiple rather than single, we wanted to capture a variety of different
approaches to achieving these goals. We would visit schools that varied
widely in pedagogical approaches, governance, and design, including
traditional comprehensive high schools, charter schools, magnet
schools, pedagogically traditional and pedagogically progressive schools,
urban schools, and suburban schools. Our plan called for us to immerse
ourselves in these places using ethnographic methods-observing
classes, talking with teachers and students, examining artifacts-to try
to understand the varied approaches to bringing public high schools
into the modern age.
The timing for such a study was ripe. While there had been a spate
of studies on high schools in the roos-captured in classic works such
as Sizer's Horace's Compromise, Lawrence-Lightfoot's The Good High
School, Powell et al's The Shopping Mall High School, and Goodlad's A
Place Called School- shifting trends in scholarship had moved away from
the kind of holistic and humanistic perspectives that characterized this
well-known work.? In addition, the creation of charter schools in the
early iggos, along with the small school movement in the late I99Os
and early zooos, meant that there was now a much greater range of
institutions to study.
We also wanted to tap into the increasing public desire to improve
high schools, which many had come to see as the final, and most chal-
lenging, frontier of K-12 school reform. While there has been some
progress in student achievement in math and reading in fourth and
eighth grades over the past several decades, high school achievement
in math and reading in the United States has been flat. The Inter-
national PISA test, which asks high school students not only to recall
information but also to apply knowledge and problem-solve, consis-
tently places the United States at the midpoint, or lower, of international
rankings. Data also consistently demonstrate that the longer students
are in school, the less engaged they feel: 75 percent of fifth graders feelWHA
scho
sup
Sara
thei
sch
tors
sho
ag!
hoi
diff
de
tha
po
ter
as
Th
gu
ch
bl
in
4
INTRODUCTION
engaged by school, but only 32 percent of eleventh graders feel simi-
larly. Since this range of indicators suggested that high school con-
tinues to be the hardest place to make progress, we were hoping to
study "break-the-mold" high schools to understand what it would take
to create engaging, equitable, and intellectually vibrant learning envi-
ronments for all adolescents.
The problem was finding such schools. Inspire was not an exception.
At school after school, as we shadowed students through their days,
we found gaps between aspirations and realities. Most classrooms were
spaces to sit passively and listen. Most academic work instructed
students to recall, or minimally apply, what they had been told. When
we asked students the purpose of what they were doing, the most
common responses were "I dunno—it's in the textbook," and "maybe
it'll help me in college." We had seen such lackluster classrooms before,
of course, but these were in highly recommended schools where we
had hoped to find a model that would transcend the norm. All too
often, things looked the way they had at Inspire: big ambitions and
significant struggles.
So, what to do? One option was to abandon the project. There
would be some funding wasted and some time squandered, but, per-
haps, better to accept the sunk costs and move on. A second option
was to turn our project into an indictment of the American educa-
tion system. In the tradition of Jonathan Kozol, John Holt, Charles
Silberman, and many others, we could write a scathing critique of
American schooling, drawing on our observations to show the ways
in which even schools that were meant to be innovative were falling
far short of their aspirations. But this ground had been covered many
times over-and part of why we wanted to write about good schools
was that we sought an antidote to the pessimism that governs so many
school reform discussions.
As we looked more closely at our data, we realized that there might
be a third option. While the dominant patterns we had observed re-
flected a school system that was trapped by a "grammar of schooling"
that was cast a century ago, there were exceptions— many different
kinds of exceptions-which, cumulatively, perhaps could help to light
a path forward. Often these exceptions were in classrooms, like Ms.
Ortiz's, where teachers had found interesting ways to engage students
in intellectually complex subjects. If the bad news was that our rec-IN
i-
1-
i-
1.
i,
e
1
]
INTRODUCTION
ommended schools, as a whole, were struggling to achieve their ambi-
tions, the good news was that at every site we found individual teachers
who had found ways to transcend the norm. In fact, it became a pre-
dictable part of our research: if we spent a day shadowing a student, we
would find one and sometimes two classes that were intellectually lively
and demanding. Over time, these classrooms became their own data
set. What were these teachers doing, how were they doing it, and how
had they come to do it? There seemed to be much to learn from them.
Another bright spot came from widening our view. In many of the
high schools we visited, much of the most powerful learning seemed
to occur not in core classes, but rather at the school's "periphery"-in
electives, clubs, and extracurriculars. Hidden in plain sight, these
peripheral spaces often had a very different "grammar" than the one that
usually dominated core classes. In these spaces, students had real choices,
learning by doing was the norm, there was time to explore matters in
depth, and students were welcomed as producers rather than receivers of
knowledge. What made these spaces tick? How could they exist, almost
entirely unnoticed, within the same schools in which core learning was
so often passive and disengaged? Might there be lessons that the "core"
could learn from the "periphery"?
Finally, as we continued our search, we did find a small number of
high schools that consistently were able to translate their espoused
values into enacted practices. In particular, we identified three very dif-
ferent schools—a project-based school, a "no excuses" school, and an
International Baccalaureate-for-all school-that were able to actualize
their visions in powerful ways. What enabled these schools to make
such headway? How had they countered the classroom-to-classroom
variation in quality that was so prevalent elsewhere? Why were admin-
istrators and teachers in these places able to achieve their aspirations
when many with similar ambitions could not? Viewed this way, our ex-
periences at Inspire and other struggling schools became useful data:
contrasting cases that could be lined up against our positive cases to
help us identify exactly what enabled some schools to transcend the
norm.
The profound differences across these three schools also allowed us
to explore a range of approaches to the remaking of the American high
school. During the course of our study, educators and scholars began
to refer more and more often to "deeper learning," an umbrella termWH
SC
SU
S
a
th
a
6
INTRODUCTION
evoking a range of ambitions that extends beyond rote learning. These
goals were not exactly pathbreaking-many schools, particularly pri-
vate schools, had embraced such ambitions for years—-but the idea of
bringing them to all students would be new. We saw close relationships
between our study and the notion of deeper learning. In fact, as we con-
sidered it further, we realized that these three schools were each
working on different parts of the deeper learning equation. The no-
excuses school, which we call No Excuses High, was particularly
focused on the challenge of equity; its leaders were trying to take the
type of traditional learning that is often found in the upper tracks of af-
fluent schools and make it available to high-poverty students of color.
The project-based school, which, we call Dewey High, was focused on
reimagining the grammar of schooling- on breaking down barriers be-
tween disciplines, on connecting the school to the broader world, and
on having students create and contribute knowledge rather than just
passively receive it. The IB school, which we call IB High, lay some-
where in the middle: drawing on an examination system created for
highly privileged students, the schools' administrators and teachers
were striving to help students do authentic work within the traditional
academic disciplines, while simultaneously seeking to extend such
learning to a wide array of learners. These schools, then, provided three
distinct visions of what the reinvented high school might look like, each
with corresponding advantages and tradeoffs.
If these high schools offered starkly divergent possibilities for the
future of schooling, we were also coming to recognize that our most
successful teachers, electives, and extracurricular spaces, wildly varied
as they were in methods, goals, and populations, all held one trait in
common: they integrated different virtues of learning. In particular, we
came to think that our own distinct vision of deep learning — not simply
in school, but in life-emerges at the intersection of three virtues:
mastery, identity, and creativity. In the spaces that teachers, students,
and our own observations identified as the most compelling, students
had opportunities to develop knowledge and skill (mastery), they came
to see their core selves as vitally connected to what they were learning
and doing (identity), and they had opportunities to enact their learning
by producing something rather than simply receiving knowledge
(creativity). Often these spaces or classrooms were governed by a logic
of apprenticeship; students had opportunities to make things (newspa-
S
F
stINTRODUCTION
7
pers, collections of poetry, documentary films, theater productions,
debate performances) under the supervision of faculty and/ or older
students who would model the creative steps involved, provide exam-
ples of high-quality work, and offer precise feedback. Not coinciden-
tally, the most successful teachers and extracurricular leaders whom
we encountered had themselves been apprenticed into their fields in a
similar way and these experiences had helped them develop a stance
about what they were doing that differed from the "teaching as trans-
mission" view that was so prevalent.
We widened our lens in other ways, too. While we initially planned
to write about schools, it became impossible to make sense of what we
were seeing without considering the interplay of external forces that
had shaped these schools. For example, Inspire and schools like it
were working against the grain in so many respects: most teachers were
teaching as they had been taught, short class periods inhibited in-depth
explorations, district-mandated curricula and teacher evaluation sys-
tems were not aligned with efforts to emphasize critical thinking, and
parental and college pressures mitigated against change. In fact, we
came to think that many of the most successful classrooms, extracur-
riculars, and schools that we encountered were successful because
they had found ways to buffer the expectations of the external eco-
system in order to create space to do something different. Thus,
when we began to write about particular schools and learning spaces,
we tried to move back and forth between describing practices on the
ground and considering the broader forces that shape or constrain those
practices. As we drafted our conclusion, we considered how these forces
might be transformed to support, rather than inhibit, powerful efforts
on the ground.
The good news is that there seems to be a growing interest in making
these shifts. When we began in 2010, this project felt far outside of the
mainstream; the attention of both the public and the K-iz world was
still focused on the test-score emphasis of No Child Left Behind.
During the intervening years, however, there has been a distinct shift.
The Common Core State Standards initiative signaled a focus on more
ambitious learning goals; policymakers and practitioners increasingly
started talking about "twenty-first-century skills"; the Obama White
House held a summit on high school reinvention; Apple funded XQ:
The Super School Project to run a nationwide competition to reinventWHAT
scho
supp
Sara
them
scho
tors a
shou
Th
aging
hour
differ
deep
than
powe
ten
as in
Thes
gue,
choic
poWe
outlie
ble fo
integ
or wi
ident
Th
couni
oram
since
ing lạ
tion-
of the
8
INTRODUCTION
schools; High Tech High, a network of project-based schools in San
Diego, now attracts more than a thousand practitioners to its annual
Deeper Learning conference; and deeper learning is now part of many
state and district policy strategies. At the beginning, we struggled to
find funding for the project; now, we find ourselves increasingly invited
to address gatherings of educators seeking to undo old systems and
create powerful learning environments for the future. And while part
of what motivated our research was the middling performance of U.S.
schools on international yardsticks, many of those who attend our ses-
sions come from other countries— they too, are trying to figure out how
to integrate mastery, identity, and creativity into a twenty-first-century
school system.
In the end, we visited thirty schools, spent more than 750 hours ob-
serving classrooms and other learning spaces, and interviewed more
than three hundred students, teachers, administrators, parents, and
other stakeholders. The picture that emerged is of an institution that
is betwixt and between when it comes to deeper learning. Schools are
actively trying to shed the long hand of the past, but have not yet
arrived at the future. This effort is truly a quest: a journey that, as yet,
has no clear path-but whose stakes make it well worth undertaking.
This is not the book we set out to write. We were seeking inspiration;
we found complexity. Our friend and colleague Marshall Ganz, who
teaches organizing, says that significant change is about urgency com-
bined with hope. The story we tell here has elements of both. On the
one hand, our research underscores the difficulty of deepening the work
of most American high schools, given that their core designs are often
unspecified and / or incoherent, and that their core programs of aca-
demic study are often fundamentally disconnected from who students
are and what they can do. In documenting these realities, we try to
show, in unvarnished terms, the size of the problem; we argue that the
change needed at scale is more one of kind than of degree. On the other
hand, we show that there are already many classrooms, electives, and
extracurriculars, as well as a few individual schools, that can light the
path, showing what powerful and purposeful learning would look like.
With humility, we suggest that if we wish to be neither paralyzed by
the scale of the problem nor seduced by the promise of easy solutions,N
1
1
t
INTRODUCTION
9
we need to look carefully at exactly what makes this work so hard—and
also at why, and under what conditions, it is possible to achieve success.
Our hope is that by sharing what we've learned we can spark an in-
formed conversation about what it would entail to build a system in
which deep learning is no longer the exception, but the rule.NING
cent
nere
lea-
ile-
tier
ons
п-
its
id
DEEPER LEARNING IN AMERICAN HIGH SCHOOLS
4I
their own experiences in high school, teachers were unlikely to have
experienced much deep learning, especially in their core academic
classes. Similarly, the widely acknowledged weakness and incoherence of
American teacher-preparation programs mean that, as they begin their
careers teachers are unlikely to have learned anything substantive about
teaching for deep learning? Finally, while we saw some progress in
breaking down the isolation that historically has plagued teaching as a
profession, we did not see much evidence that teacher collaborations
were leading to more rigorous instruction.? On the whole, we observed
that even if teachers yearn to infuse their classrooms with greater
vitality and depth, they lack rich models for what these qualities might
look like and what it might take to generate them—so they default to
teaching in the ways that they themselves were taught.
How to Support Deeper Learning: A Preview
Against this backdrop, it becomes easier to understand what we
witnessed in schools. Schools that were trying to create challenging,
rigorous, purposeful education had to combat a series of historical and
contemporary forces that were working directly against their objec-
tives. That these forces included omissions as well as constraints meant
that, in order to achieve their goals, schools had to supply themselves
much of what was missing.
We develop our arguments in more detail in later chapters, but as a
preview, we found that:
• To close the gap between espoused values and enacted practices, schools
need a specific and granular vision of deep learning and a carefully
crafted organizational design that enables them to realize it. Because
teachers are not typically trained for deeper learning, schools
have to organize much of this learning themselves if they are
going to create consistent levels of quality across classrooms.
Specifically, we found that the schools most successful at real-
izing their visions, while varied in their pedagogical approaches,
had generated a specific and finely detailed vision of learning,
developed extensive opportunities for adults to learn that vision,
organized that adult learning in ways that were symmetrical to
87: 1342
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
the ways in which they expected adults to teach students, made
student and teacher work visible to create some accountability,
developed a collective identity that engendered teacher and
student ownership of the vision, and aligned organizational
processes to support all of these efforts. Even for schools
working within external systems, like International Baccalau-
reate, that could provide the external "exoskeleton" to support
deep learning, a parallel internal "endoskeleton" with these fea-
tures was required
• Achieving deeper learning is challenging because it requires significant
unlearning: For traditional teachers, moving toward giving their
students deeper experiences in their domains entailed substantial
loss: of some breadth in pursuit of depth, and of control, as
teachers realized that being a teacher didn't always mean talking
in front of the class. Making these shifts was difficult and painful,
and even for our most successful teachers it often took many
years. Thematically organized schools faced another version of
this challenge at the organizational level: No Excuses High was
trying to figure out how to reboot its culture of control to pre-
pare students for the more open-ended environment of college;
Dewey High was trying to find ways to continue to mount au-
thentic and meaningful projects while integrating the building
of foundational skills. For each of these schools, their core DNA,
organizational processes, and culture were coherent and oriented
in one direction. Integrating new goals was challenging because
doing so would require undoing much of what had brought them
success in the first place.
• Powerful learning experiences integrate seemingly opposing virtues:
mastery, identity, and creativity. Whether in classes, extracurricu-
lars, clubs, or elsewhere, students identified their most powerful
learning experiences as those that gave them opportunities to
develop knowledge and skill (mastery), become intensely con-
nected to a domain (identity), and have an ability to enact their
understandings by trying to make something meaningful to them
(creativity). Apprenticeship models, in which students tried (and
often failed) to do something under the watchful eye of more ex-
perienced teachers and students, were particularly well aligned
with this integrated mode of learning.DEEPER LEARNING IN AMERICAN HIGH SCHOOLS
• The periphery is often more vital than the core; outside the core classes
is a second "grammar of schooling" that is better aligned with power-
ful learning. The so-called peripheral aspects of school-
extracurriculars, clubs, and electives—-had a very different
grammar than core classes. Here students could make significant
choices, they saw purpose in their work, learning by doing was
common, depth was privileged over breadth, students were ap-
prenticed to older students, and learning frequently integrated
head, hands, and heart. While what happened to students during
these peripheral activities was still dependent on the knowledge
and skill of the people who led them, the core assumptions that
guided these experiences seemed to support rather than constrain
their efforts.
• Some teachers were able to bring deeper learning to their core classes by
taking a very different stance toward learning than most traditional
teachers. Because schools are loosely coupled organizations, even
though the dominant patterns were grim, there were pockets of
deeper learning in almost every school. The teachers who led
these compelling classrooms differed from most of our teachers
on a number of interrelated dimensions, which we call their stance
toward teaching: they saw the purpose of what they were doing
as less about covering material and more about inducting students
into the work of their field; they privileged depth over breadth;
they saw students as creators and not simply receivers of knowl-
edge; they saw failure not as something to be avoided but as a
necessary part of learning; and they tried to create an atmosphere
of rigor and joy rather than compliance.
• Those teachers who were able to provide deeper learning experiences for
students had themselves had a "seminal learning experience" that had
inspired them and helped them to see what it would entail to induct the
next generation into their fields of study. These teachers could each
point to experiences during the latter part of college, in graduate
school, or in the real world, when they had begun actually doing
the work of the field or domain that they would teach. While they
had had many mediocre learning experiences as students,
they drew on these rare but powerful learning experiences to
generate a different vision of their goals and practices. The im-
plication for teacher preparation as well as for ongoing teacher
4344
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
learning is that more teachers need to have these kinds of experi-
ences if they are going to create something similar for their
students.
• While some have posited that these methods are appropriate only for
advantaged students, our research suggests that students who are most
disaffected from school are the ones most in need of new approaches.
The teachers who were most effective at providing deeper learning
experiences saw the approaches they were developing as particu-
larly important for their most disadvantaged and disaffected
students, because they were the ones who were least well served
by traditional schooling. The teachers made sensible alterations
for students with weaker skills- shorter texts, more careful
scaffolding-but their core stance was the same for all students:
inducting students into a domain by creating experiences that
linked mastery, identity, and creativity.
• The system is not oriented toward deeper learning; our most successful
examples had to buffer themselves from external pressures. If we want
more deep learning, we need to change the system. Because the external
environment-including testing, parental expectations, college
pressures, and district scope and sequence— is not aligned toward
deeper learning, our most successful classrooms, teachers, schools,
and extracurriculars had to find ways to buffer themselves from
these pressures in order to make space for the powerful learning
environments they were trying to create. It is not a coincidence
that electives, extracurriculars, and clubs-chosen and untested
domains-were often these deeper spaces. If deeper learning is
to move from the periphery into the core, the external environ-
ment will need to shift its assessments, culture, and other expec-
tations to align with deeper learning.