378
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
of unlearning if they are going to shift from one cultural and struc-
tural mode to another.
Finally, there is no substitute for a mature set of humanistic values
that adults model and that guide key decisions at the school. IB High,
for example, sought a tricky balance that would enable it to be a school
that was highly committed to equity and yet not all-consumed by scores
on IB exams. Holding this balance was what made the school what it
was. On the one hand, had its leaders fallen into the trap of many other
schools, by trying simply to maximize scores, they would have increased
the test-prep focus and drained much of the intellectual vitality from
the school. On the other hand, had they not been so committed to
equity, reducing the focus on outcomes could have significantly low-
ered standards and increased inequality. More generally, having adults
who really cared about their students, who knew when to push and
when to support, was critical to the success of all the good schools
that we encountered.
Reimagining the Grammar of Schooling
These organizational elements, when cross-cut by a strong and clear
vision of what deeper learning means, can enable the creation of a deeper
school that works within the current grammar of schooling. IB High is
the best example in our sample. There, a pedagogical vision organized
around inquiry-based instruction, an external measurement system
oriented toward deeper competencies, a strong learning culture for
adults, and a commitment to equity enabled the school to create a cul-
ture of thinking and respect for student ideas that was truly impres-
sive. For many schools, then, this could be a model for how to create
deeper learning schoolwide without making fundamental changes to
subject areas, age-graded classrooms, boundaries between schools and
their external communities, and other taken-for-granted aspects of
schooling.
At the same time, peeking through in examples from Dewey High
at its best, in some of the electives at Attainment High, in clubs and
extracurriculars, and in certain other schools that have been profiled
in the literature, is a different way of organizing learning experi-
ences. In the interests of pushing the envelope, we will present such
a vision in its full-blown form. But one can also regard what follows
as options on a continuum. School leaders might keep much of whatMASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
379
they have in place but try some of these ideas with one grade level, or
they might preserve a disciplinary approach to math while adopting
an interdisciplinary approach in the humanities. Thus, while we will
present a different grammar of schooling as a full-blown alternative,
it could be adopted in pieces and married to a more conventional
structure.
Central to this vision are a set of presumptions about students, de-
velopment, and learning that were shared across these environments but
are often not present in traditional schooling. The first presumption
understands students as purposeful, curious, capable beings who have
interests that can be developed and who value being treated as respon-
sible people. Consequently, for education in this mode to work, students
need some choice and agency over their learning, coupled with guid-
ance from more experienced students and adults. While agency and
choice are important, we cannot lose sight of the fact that adolescents
fundamentally are seeking community, people with whom they can böth
learn and relate. This priority leads to the further presumption: that
powerful learning is fundamentally about connections- between students
and teachers, between students and other students, between students'
selves and the subjects they are studying, between subjects and other
CONNECT
subjects, between students and out-of-school mentors, between subjects
and their applications in the word beyond school. Such learning is also (dAnie
dynamic and responsive to the surrounding world— each year, the world
is a little different, and thus slightly different things will seem impor-
tant to students and teachers. Clubs respond to such shifts by growing
and changing, but subjects often seem frozen in place. Finally, all of.
these presumptions need to be made about adults as well as students-
adults need purpose in their work, they need both choice and commu-
nity, they need time to work with one another and to connect with
knowledgeable others beyond school walls, and they need an opportu-
nity to revise as fields evolve, as the world changes, and as new ideas
become salient.
While some teachers can realize these ends within regular classes,
for an institution to achieve them schoolwide and on a consistent basis
would require significant changes to the grammar of schooling. Such a
re-envisioning would begin with defining a clearer sense of the pur-
pose of a powerful education, and move from there to making changes
in roles, time, space, assessment, and a variety of other dimensions of
schooling (see Table 8.1).380
Table 8.1 Reimagining the Grammar of Schooling
Existing grammar
of schooling
Purpose
Assimilate
preexisting
content
View of knowledge
Siloed and fixed
Learning modality
Roles
Boundaries between
disciplines
Boundaries between
school and world
Places where students
learn
Choice
Time
Space
Assessment
Teaching as
transmission
One teacher,
many students
Strong
Strong
Schools
Organizational model
Stance toward
community
Limited
Short blocks of
fixed length
Individual
classrooms
Seat time,
standardized
tests
Linear, top-down
planning
Defensive;
keeping out
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
New grammar of schooling
Engage student as producer in
variety of fields and worthy
human pursuits
Constructed, interconnected,
and dynamic
Learning through doing;
apprenticeship; whole game at
junior level
Vertically integrated communi-
ties: teachers, students as
eachers, and field member
providing expertis
Permeable
Various, including schools,
community centers, field sites,
Open, multiple
sage, sara de locks, time for
Linked spaces, vattable spaces
Creation of worthy products in
inquiry
Welcoming; inviting in
Central to this rethinking would be a determination to break down
the barriers we put around learning. A conventional classroom in a dis-
ciplinary subject (say, biology) is cut off from people who do that disci-
pline in the world (biologists), from students in older grades who might
know more about the subject, from adults other than the teacher who
are knowledgeable about that field, from the knowledge about the sub-
ject that isn't prescribed by the teacher, and from work in related disci-
plines that would inform the subject.NING
n
at
MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
38I
In a revamped vision of schooling, students would be connected to
various sources of learning. The central image we have in mind, bor-
rowed from the arts, athletics, graduate school, and the world of work,
is what we think of as a vertically integrated community, in which the
purpose is clear, the need for the learner to produce is a driving force,
learners master more and more complex skills by being in a commu-
nity of people who have those skills, and apprenticeship is a primary
mode of learning. 23 Such communities have the advantage of engen-
dering the different virtues needed for serious learning: opportunities
for practice and oversight from more knowledgeable others build mas-
tery; engagement in the domain and gradually becoming an effective
producer in the domain build identity, and the need to make real prod-
ucts for real audiences unleashes creativity. Over time, as students en-
gage with increasingly sophisticated communities of people who are
doing what they want to learn, they deepen their understanding and
ability to act in those domains. Animating this approach are two core
ideas: first, that knowledge exists in an interconnected web to which
students should have access; and second, that gradually inducting stu-
dents into apprenticeship-based communities is a powerful way to en-
courage the creation of passionate and skilled learners. It is our view
that, together, these ideas could be the foundation of a revamped
grammar of schooling.
How might we organize schools with these ideas in mind? Imagine
a statistics strand curated by an adult at the school in which students
analyzed statistical claims in the news, sampled from college lectures
or essays on the manipulative use of numbers to further political agendas,
did mini-lessons on key statistical topics (either taught by the teacher or
organized into self-paced modules), then developed a project that used
statistical analysis to explore a topic of interest. Some students within
this statistics strand might dual-enroll in a college statistics course,
others might intern with a local pro team to see how analytics are
being used in sports, and still others might intern at a government
agency to see how statistics are employed there. A humanities teacher
might help them think about who gets to construct statistics, how they
have been used, and to what end, with a particular focus on the rela-
tionship between numbers and power. There could be a presentation
day when students and their mentors would come together to discuss
the uses of statistics in these various arenas. Such an approach would382
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
show students the many tributaries into which statistics runs, meet the
students' differing interests and abilities where they are, encourage stu-
dents to reflect critically on the role of numbers in society, ask them to
use this learning to produce something that matters to them, and con-
nect students to academic or real-world uses of numbers to deepen their
mathematical and / or practical understanding of statistics.
While bringing together all of these elements is beyond what most
schools have thus far tried, we did come across models that have im-
plemented some of these ideas. For example, to the degree that schools
want to retain disciplines as their primary units of study, some have
connected to colleges to show students what happens when people pro-
duce knowledge in those subjects. For example, at the Midwestern
Math and Science Academy, students spend half of every Wednesday
working in college laboratories. While arranging this is not easy-buses
have to be chartered, professors and doctoral students have to be vetted
to ensure they give the high school students real work and follow
through on their commitments-it does show students what actual
science is. No Excuses High does something similar by placing stu-
dents in nearby labs, showing that such an approach need not be lim-
ited to highly selective schools. Early College High Schools offer a
systematic way of pursuing such a vision, enabling high school stu-
dents to enroll in college courses while still in high school; evalua-
tions of this program suggest that it has had a large impact in in-
creasing college enrollment. 24
Rethinking the grammar of schooling also creates opportunities for
interdisciplinary or even transdisciplinary study. Most high school stu-
dents are not enthralled with the disciplines per se; rather, they are
more interested in questions in the world that draw on disciplines to
answer them. Project-based schools already have a good model for
this--schools like Dewey High help students find consequential ques-
tions, have them leave the school to investigate them, and then produce
artifacts that they hope will matter to real audiences.?5 One central chal-
lenge here, as we stressed in our chapter on Dewey High, is to develop
and sustain serious standards of quality to guide the work. The best
projects often involve considerable feedback from experts in the relevant
fields-as was true of some of the most successful design projects at At-
tainment High-which can help to integrate the standards of the
broader field into the work of the school and the minds of students.MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
Such a recharged educational vision would also create opportunities
for many more types of institutions and adults to offer learning expe-
riences to students. Architectural firms, hospitals, community centers,
design studios, artists' collaboratives, museums, theaters, and many
more institutions might be potential sites for student learning. For
example, the Philadelphia Science and Leadership Academy, a school
in which 7o percent of students are of color and 5o percent are eligible
for free or reduced-price lunch, partners with the Franklin Institute,
a world-renowned science museum named after Benjamin Franklin, to
have students take "mini-courses" taught by Franklin Institute scholars
on' a range of scientific topics, including astronomy, computer program-
ming, and project design. The students use the museum's enormous
resources to do hands-on work and further their studies in different
domains.26 At the MC' STEM school in Cleveland, a partnership
with General Electric enables students to work alongside scientists,
engineers, and managers to build robots, solar-powered phone char-
gers, and other products that connect theory and practice in physics.27
Exactly what partnerships are possible depends on the specific location
and context of the school, but the core principles are the same.
Such an approach should also give students more choice about what
it is they want to learn and where they want to learn it. If becoming
interested in a domain is a necessary ingredient for sustained study and
learning, giving students some choice over what and where they study
is a critical first step. At Avalon Charter School, a teacher-run school
in Minnesota, the school year starts by asking ninth graders "What do
you want to learn?" and "What would you like to do better?"; the year's
curricula are then developed from those questions.?8 At the I School in
New York, students nominate and rank elective topics; then faculty rank
which of those they would be interested in teaching. Electives for the
following year sit at the intersection of student and faculty interests. In
addition to such on-site opportunities, as MOOCs and other online
courses continue to expand, there will be opportunities for interested
students to study a much more varied set of subjects than traditionally
has been offered in school. Teachers' responsibilities in these instances
would be to use their adult judgment to assist students in choosing
among potential options, to help them process what they are taking in
through such courses, and, as needed, to scaffold the learning in ways
that connect where students are to what is being offered online.Seir
384
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
Reorganizing the role of time is another important part of this equa-
fion.2ª Many priyate high schools and some public high schools have
moved to a schedule where students study three to four subjects for
ninety minutes at a time, rather than retaining the seven forty-five-
minute blocks per day that were the norm. Other schools have moved
to create periods of time during the year (two- to three-week blocks)
during which students work intensively on only one topic, enabling con-
centrated effort and creating opportunities to go off campus for field-
embedded or project-based learning. 3º A more ambitious version of this
idea is to send students to other parts of the country or, ideally, to other
countries to get to know different cultures and to complete a service
project with members of the receiving community. Doing so would en-
courage students to build both civic and global skills, improve their
second-language abilities, and see beyond the borders of their local
communities and their nation.
Assessment would also shift. Rather than evaluating students on seat
time in conventional classes or on the results of standardized tests, the
goal would be to evaluate students on the basis.of their performance in
domain-specific arenas. The "assessment" of the students in The Ser-
vant of Two Masters was their show night; the assessment of students
who produce the student newspaper is the quality of that newspaper;
the assessment of project-based learning is the quality of the final arti-
fact that is presented or performed. In the more conventional academic
disciplines, we might require that for high school graduation a student
needs to produce one substantial piece of work in the natural sciences,
the humanities, and the social sciences. A social science "thesis," for
example, would require students to review the literature, develop hy-
potheses, create a strategy for data gathering, collect and analyze the
data, write up an argument, and reflect on limitations. If a student could
successfully achieve a product of that magnitude in the social sciences,
and equivalent ones in the natural sciences and the humanities, he or
she would have demonstrated significant familiarity with the tools and
methods of three broad modes of inquiry that shape how we understand
the world
A renewed vision of schooling would also include a different approach
to how space is used within a school31 The way space is currently or-
ganized reifies many of the most regressive tendencies of industrial
schooling: each teacher is alone in a classroom of twenty to thirty-fiveEARNING
s equa-
Is have
cts for
y-five-
noved
locks)
§ con-
field-
if this
other
rvice
den-
their
ocal
seat
the
e in
Ser-
ints
ser;
•ti-
nic
int
eS,
y-
le
'd
MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
385
students, with limited opportunities for collaboration or flexible group-
ings. A whole field of twenty-first-century school design is emerging
that seeks to organize space in ways that would parallel the future of
learning 32 Proposed innovations include creating rooms of varying
sizes to accommodate different learning modalities, using glass walls
to preserve some privacy while also integrating classrooms into the
broader environment, and building "hubs" that link different classrooms
and promote exchanges of both student and teacher learning. Movable
partitions can also enable two classes to come together (say for project-
based or interdisciplinary blocks) but be separated for other learning
modalities. Some of the best learning spaces we visited intentionally
sought to soften the institutional feel of schooling by using rugs, lamps,
beanbag chairs, and other warm touches to make classrooms feel
personal and welcoming. While there are certainly examples of unin-
spired, stultifying learning experiences set in beautiful physical spaces,
the development of a new space can spark a discussion about what kind
of teaching and learning a school is seeking, and how a new space can
support new collaborations and learning goals.
All of these changes in what students experience would need to be
paralleled in changes to the work of teachers. For example, schools
would need to give teachers some choice over their teaching and
learning, opportunities to collaborate both with one another and with
outside sources of knowledge, methods of assessment of their work
consistent with the highest standards of their domain, and so forth.
Perhaps the most critical ingredients here are time and symmetry.
American teachers teach more and have much less time to plan with
their colleagues than do their counterparts in other nations.3 If we
are asking teachers to change their routines and develop quite dif-
ferent new practices, we need to give them substantial time to work
together to develop such practices, or any initial momentum will be
quickly lost. Teachers, especially newer teachers, also need fewer "preps"
(classes to prepare each day) which would enable them to work in
more depth on each class. On symmetry, if teachers are going to
create an environment in which students are treated as capable agents
whose views should be respected and whose interests should be devel-
oped, they need to experience an equivalent level of consideration and
a similarly welcoming and respectful environment in the schools that
employ them.
NEP
fice
work386
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
As schools move in this direction, they will need to be attentive to
maintaining the critical qualities of mastery, identity, and creativity. It
is quite possible to place students in real-world settings where they are
not doing interesting work, to create interdisciplinary learning that is
shallow rather than deep, to create projects where students learn much
about the part and nothing about the whole. Relaxing the grammar of
schooling creates a more varied set of containers, a potentially more
transformative set of educational possibilities, but whether that poten-
tial is realized still depends heavily on what happens inside those con-
tainers. Teachers and school leaders need to be vigilant about the quality
of the reimagined experiences they put forward if a changed grammar
is actually going to translate into improvements in students' quality of
learning.
The Politics
A major part of the challenge of building deeper learning schools is to
create the political space they need. Schools have two potential strate-
gies, which are not mutually exclusive. The first, which we might call
advocating, is to try directly to cultivate support for their work among
parents, school boards, and district administrators. The second, which
we might call buffering, is to find a way to meet the expectations of
those external audiences by acquiescing to conventional benchmarks,
while also creating enough space to do the work that the school actu-
ally cares about. The strategies are not mutually exclusive. In either
case, the internal work of organizing teaching and learning has to be
linked to an effort to manage the external environment.
To take the first strategy first, advocating, clearly the preferable ap-
proach is to talk directly with stakeholders about the value of deeper
learning. School leaders can articulate the importance of "twenty-first-
century skills" in the contemporary economy and can emphasize that
the kind of learning being attempted will build the skills students will
need for college and careers 34 Creating powerful learning experiences
that involve connections with partners or applications that connect
theory and practice will also help to enlist the advocacy of students, who
can in turn convey to their parents what is special about the school.
Dewey High has found that highly public exhibitions of learning are
an effective way of showing what students have learned to parents andMASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
community members, and thereby to build momentum and support.
Stressing that this kind of work does not mean sacrificing core academic
skills, and, in fact, that such skills can be better developed through these
methods, is also a necessary and important part of the message. For high
schools in particular, college acceptance rates and placements can be-
come the key metric (as opposed to test scores); parents are willing to
grant flexibility if they are confident that the end result will still be a
strong college option. 35
The schools featured in this book faced the usual pressures associ-
ated with test scores, Carnegie Units, and other external constraints
that could not be directly altered. But they employed a form of double
bookkeeping they satisfied the external metrics, but they were also
clear internally about what they thought was actually important-thus
buffering the school from outside expectations. For example, until re-
cently Dewey High downplayed the importance of test scores, stressing
to its teachers that students needed to pass state tests (thereby satisfying
the external authorities) but not to score particularly highly on them,
while teachers would be evaluated on the quality of their students' prod-
ucts. Downplaying the test scores created an internal alignment of
expectations. At the New York City I School, all students are asked to
take and pass the Regents Examinations by the end of tenth grade
(with test prep provided, if necessary); they then take an all-elective
curriculum for eleventh and twelfth grades. The same school also has
found a way around Carnegie Units-the high school graduation re-
quirement that students accumulate a certain number of credits in
each disciplinary subject-by creating interdisciplinary classes and al-
locating half of the credits to each of the disciplines involved, so that a
history of science class, for example, is counted as half history and half
science.
Other school leaders are banding together and working with re-
searchers to find ways to measure other competencies-social-emotional
learning, strong academic writing, powerful project-based learning-
initiatives that will, in the long run, enable them to measure what
they actually value.36 New assessments are critical because otherwise
students will continue to be measured on tests that may or may not
align with the school's core missions. Once a school passes a basic
minimum of mandated external markers, school leaders of deeper
learning schools can use the fact that they are distinctive to create a388
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
self-reinforcing virtuous cycle that both strengthens the school and
protects it from external skeptics. In the case of both Dewey High and
IB High, their initial wins and innovative approaches made it easier to
attract ambitious teachers, as well as like-minded parents and students.
It also bought them some protection from their respective districts,
which did not want to disturb politically popular school options.
Creating Deeper Systems
At the same time, a school that is succeeding in producing powerful
learning should not find it necessary to "buffer" itself from its own dis-
trict or school board. In the long run, if deeper learning is to go to
scale, these systems and their expectations will themselves need to
change.
Balancing Breadth and Depth
The first specific issue on which district leadership could be helpful is
by developing a new balance between breadth and depth. Teachers con-
sistently told us that their biggest obstacles to "deeper" learning were
the pacing guides developed by districts that dictated the rate at which
students were supposed to learn. These guides, and the subjects they
referred to, were developed out of a healthy appreciation of what it
means to be an educated citizen. Who could argue that a high school
graduate should not know something of Shakespeare, Newton, Darwin,
Baldwin, Langston Hughes, American and world history, and other ele-
ments of a liberal arts education?
The problem arose in translating theory into practice. The crush of
information that students were asked to know, and all that that entails,
precluded deep exploration of any subject and meant that students
had considerable trouble remembering what they had, in theory,
learned. Conversely, almost all of the best learning experiences we saw
involved students immersing themselves in a discipline and learning
how it actually worked rather than confronting a canned version of
it. When, judging with adult eyes, we saw significant comprehension
of a subject-an ability not only to know but to do the things in the
domain-it was almost always when students had gone "deep" into a
MASTE
field.
1n a 1
topic
real e
work
class
singl
and r
cour:
do ci
exan
dent:
theol
inev:
econ
inter
thest
conr
a civ
men
somi
long
mea
dard
rath
disti
cies
mov
buil
that
trici
fere
and
WOU
shel
molLEARNING
100l and
ligh and
easier to
tudents.
istricts,
IS.
werful
vn dis-
'go to
eed to
›ful is
i con-
were
thich
they
lat it
hool
win,
ele-
h of
ails,
ents
ory,
saw
ing
of
on
he
) a
MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
389
field. At the same time, rather ironically, developing "deep" knowledge
in a domain also requires breadth-understanding how a particular
topic, fact, or event fits into the bigger picture is critical to developing
real expertise in an area.
There are ways to marry breadth and depth. Consider ninth-grade
world history, a subject we saw again and again in our research. The
class usually raced from ancient history to the French revolution in a
single year, through a blur of dynasties and an endless stream of dates
and names that went in one ear and out the other. Imagine if that same
course was reorganized around the following essential question: "Why
do civilizations rise and fall?" This question forces coverage, as students
examine the Greeks, Romans, Mayans, and others, but it also casts stu-
dents into the role of a historical social scientist as they seek to develop
theories, weigh evidence, and consider context. Such a course also would
inevitably bring to the fore, in vital and relevant ways, questions of
economics, government, culture, and many other forces and their
interactions—-presumably a central reason that we are interested in
these different civilizations in the first place. Such an examination could
connect to the contemporary debate about whether America is or is not
a civilization in decline, a question recently raised by some noted com-
mentators.3? It might also help students to remember longer at least
some of what they have learned, because historical events would no
longer resemble a string of facts but rather become part of a pattern of
meaning that the students themselves had developed.
In this vein, newer approaches have urged the development of stan-
dards that emphasize a small number of core ideas or essential questions
rather than a laundry list of discrete pieces of content or skills. American
districts that have made a shift toward twenty-first-century competen-
cies as well as leading provinces abroad, such as British Columbia, have
moved in this direction.38 Critical to the success of this approach is
building opportunities for teachers to adapt mandated core courses
that have preestablished goals and objectives. Let's say a school or dis-
trict decides that all ninth graders should learn something about dif-
ferent civilizations in world history, something about why they rise
and fall, as well as something about how historians and social scientists
would adjudicate the questions of why they rise and fall. Within that
shell, it would be wise to create some flexibility, letting teachers spend
more time on eras or periods that they or their students are particularly390
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
interested in. If, for example, students became curious about whether
there are parallels between the fall of Rome and America today, they
could research the topic, looking at differences as well as similarities;
critically examine the work of commentators who have made this com-
parison; and perhaps conclude with a public debate or set of essays or
blogposts on the subject. Creating the space and flexibility for this
kind of exploration is what brings learning alive—no longer are stu-
dents among a sea of teenagers to learn about Rome; now they are the
first students to enter into an ongoing debate about what Rome's ex-
ample means for leading powers in the contemporary world. If the goal
were to explore five civilizations over nine months, such an in-depth
exploration would not sacrifice the goal of helping students see the range
of ways in which people have chosen to live.
Schools and districts could also hold firm on certain skills they want
students to develop— to be able to analyze texts, to write with skill and
authority, to develop and carry out a scientific investigation, to do ef-
fective research, and to reason quantitatively— even as they gave schools
and teachers more flexibility in the amount of time devoted to partic-
ular subjects. Ms. Morgan, the English chair at Attainment High, held
this position: she gave teachers some flexibility in choosing the texts they
taught, receiving in return the promise that they would agree to
common goals focused on building students' reading and writing skills.
Assessments and Curricula That Support Deeper Learning
When we first started our study of deeper learning in high schools,
David Cohen, a wise University of Michigan professor, said to us, "Well,
have you found any yet? There are no incentives for it." His words
proved to be prophetic: everywhere we went, teachers and students told
us that the external assessments were pushing against deep learning
In the early years of our study, these were state tests under No Child
Left Behind; they also could be state tests that were required for
student graduation. Even Advanced Placement tests were often described
by teachers, in spite of the College Board's claims, as emphasizing breadth
over depth and superficial content knowledge over deeper understanding
of core processes and concepts in the disciplines. As we described ear-
lier, many of the most powerful examples of deep learning that we
found were in electives and extracurriculars, precisely because these
are domains where students' skills are not tested.
M
W
m
Si
th
m
of
ta
rii
pr
E)
sil
re.
br
or
en
or
Ni
for
po
of
ric
tes
lea
the
1n8
wh
col
cer
of:
ins
ten
kn
wri'ER LEARNING
out whether
today, they
imilarities;
this com-
if essays or
ty for this
er are stu-
ey are the
'ome's ex-
f the goal
in-depth
the range
hey want
skill and
so do ef-
schools
' partic-
3h, held
Xts they
gree to
3 skills.
hools,
'Well,
vords
s told
ning.
Child
1 for
ibed
adth
ling
ear-
we
ese
MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
39I
Thus, if American society is to get serious about deeper learning, we
will need to change how schools and students are externally assessed.
There is no shortage of potential models that could be adopted or
adapted. The United States could follow the International Baccalaureate
model, or examination systems in other countries such as England,
Singapore, and Australia, and develop district or state-level assessments
that measure deeper learning competencies? In these models, assess-
ments usually feature a culminating "sit down" exam that entails a series
of essays or other open-ended problems, as well as a series of specified
tasks within the classroom that require learners to demonstrate the va-
riety of skills and knowledge important in a domain. This classroom
portion could mean the development of a portfolio of work, as in the
English examination system, or it could be a longer investigation of a
single problem, such as in the Singaporean science exams, which re-
quire students to develop a hypothesis, plan an investigation, record
reliable data, interpret experimental results, and reflect on the methods
used. This classroom portion is most often scored internally with a ru-
bric, but it is also possible to have panels of experts evaluate the work,
or, as IB does, to audit a sample of the classroom-level scoring to
ensure that external standards are being upheld. It is also possible to
organize systems for external scoring of portfolios; for example, the
New York Performance Standards Consortium, a group of more than
forty public secondary schools, allows students to submit graduation
portfolios rather than take parts of the Regents exams. The key to any
of these systems is that they do not incentivize the narrowing of cur-
ricula or reward the ability to succeed on low-level multiple choice
tests; instead, they position the accountability system to reward deeper
learning.
A powerful, if under-recognized, player in potentially bringing about
these desired shifts is college. Specifically, in our travels we saw a mis-
match between what high schools thought that colleges wanted and
what college faculty actually wanted. High school teachers thought that
college faculty wanted content knowledge— students who had learned
certain themes in Shakespeare or who could recite the key components
of a molecule. But unless students have AP credit, a freshman college
instructor can't assume that a freshman has any particular piece of con-
tent knowledge, so freshman courses usually require very little specific
knowledge. What does help students in college are skills: the ability to
write well, to think analytically, to persevere in solving hard problems392
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
and deciphering difficult texts. Not surprisingly, then, those are the
skills that college faculty value. They know they can teach the content,
but they want students who have developed the disposition to learn and
who have had practice with writing and analysis.t Standing between
the college and high school faculties are the tests given by the College
Board (particularly the SAT Ils and the APs) and the college admis-
sions offices, which need an efficient way to process tens of thousands
of applications. But while the current modes are efficient, they are not
capturing the qualities that college faculty actually value. If colleges
were to recast their admission procedures and start valuing other
markers of achievement-including IB, portfolio assessments, or
other yet-to-be-developed assessments—-high schools would follow
suit, and the new system would better reflect the values of both high
schools and colleges. 41
Deeper learning also demands a different approach to curriculum de-
sign. While teachers, especially experienced teachers, may develop or
adapt their own curricula, it is unrealistic to expect wholesale changes
in teaching without materials that would support such a shift. 42 In dif-
ferent disciplines, efforts have cropped up that begin to do this work.
For instance, Sam Wineburg, a Stanford professor and former history
teacher, has developed an American history curriculum and set of les-
sons that can be taught in forty-five-minute periods. They feature
opportunities for student meaning-making, along with analysis of pri-
mary sources and debate, and they cover much of the same ground as
would be found in most American history courses. 43 The George Lucas
Educational Foundation has developed curriculum modules for AP En-
vironmental Science and AP Government; these modules are organized
into five project-based units that still prepare students for the exams.44
Early research has found that students going through these curricula do
as well as control groups on the AP tests, but are much stronger with
respect to deeper learning competencies such as working in teams and
designing social inquiry approaches. The reform math community,
which is comprised of thousands of teachers and researchers around the
country, shares over Twitter "high ceiling, low floor" math problems,
which provide materials to both engage and challenge students in
math. 4 There can and should be more efforts of this type. As Expedi-
tionary Learning's Ron Berger has pointed out, even within the existing
standards, there are often more and less interesting ways to teach theING
he
it,
i-
Is
t
MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
393
same standard. Well-designed curriculum materials can help teachers
find the more powerful approaches. 47
Districts: Inverting the Pyramid
While the focus of our study is schools, it is clear that districts are a
big part of the problem and thus could become a big part of the solution
when it comes to deeper learning. Outside of college pressures, the three
biggest barriers to deeper learning that teachers cited were district aM
pacing guidelines, teacher evaluation systems, and pressure from state
tests. All of these are manifestations of a systemic problem: districts
were created a century ago in a command and control, compliance-
oriented model that is antithetical to modern learning. In the spirit of
symmetry, the qualities associated with student deeper learning-
having opportunities to take risks, acknowledging that failure is part
of learning, having some control and choice over one's learning- should
instead characterize the adult culture in our schools and districts.
While there are some specific strategies that districts could under-
take to support deeper learning, the biggest and most fundamental shift
needed is cultural. Like most public bureaucracies, districts tend to
avoid risk, seek control, and have "the many" implement the ideas of
"the few."48 More developed professions, as well as modern learning
organizations of all types, work in a different way. Instead of placing
their faith in a small administrative class to supervise a weak practi-
tioner class, they realize that the work is too complex and variable to
be easily standardized from above, and thus that they should invest more
in the selection and training of the practitioners. With this as a foun-
dation, there becomes less need for administrative oversight. Making
this shift from a bureaucratic approach to a more professional one is
imperative if the goal is to support teachers in teaching for deeper
learning. 49
As with schools that have been organized hierarchically, this change
will require significant unlearning. District personnel, who have been
socialized to believe that "fidelity of implementation" is king and that
their job is to direct outcomes, will need to re-culture themselves to
see that students and teachers are paramount and that the district's fun-
damental role is to support and catalyze these learning communities.
As with teachers who initially feel that if they are not directly instructing394
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
they are not really teaching, district officials will need time and space
to transition from "command and control" to "empower, fertilize, and
catalyze."50
If district leaders and personnel were to adopt this different orienta-
tion, then a host of more specific strategies that districts could undertake
to deepen learning for both teachers and students become viable. Dis-
tricts that have adopted this orientation have frequently begun by
using an EdLeader21 tool called "portrait of a graduate," through which
a variety of community stakeholders come together to define the skills
and competencies that they want students to acquire." While the spe-
cifics vary, when asked to reflect seriously about their values, most com-
munities choose a version of the following: they want their students to
think critically, collaborate with others, build character, and otherwise
develop into thoughtful and ethical human beings. With this goal es-
tablished, a district could revisit the decisions it makes. With respect
to curriculum, for instance, it could do a "deeper learning audit":
working with teachers, it could name the core skills and knowledge that
are sought for a particular subject and grade, then revamp the curric-
ulum to develop a few extended investigations to explore that topic (for
example, turning a world history survey course into a comparative in-
vestigation of five civilizations). If such an audit were consistently car-
ried out over grades and disciplines, district expectations for teaching
would line up with teachers' efforts to go deep rather than broad. If the
district were then to make different decisions about assessment—
moving toward the more performance-based, integrationist approach
described earlier— then the whole system would become more aligned
with twenty-first-century standards.
The next step would be to revamp the approach to teacher learning.
Professional growth is especially important given the magnitude of the
shift that we need in what teachers know and can do. Unfortunately,
current approaches to professional development violate the tenets of
deeper learning as well as what is known about powerful adult learning.
Teachers frequently sit through presentations on topics they haven't
chosen. As one report quoted a frustrated teacher, "We walk into a room
and get the handouts. We sit and listen to a PowerPoint, usually without
paying attention. Then an hour goes by and we go to the next session."S2
Another teacher in the same report said, "PD is something we go and
do. We line up to get vaccinated." A better approach would significantlyKING
lace
and
ta-
Ike
is-
by
ch
Ils
=-
2-
e
t
MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
395
change this paradigm in a number of respects: teachers would have a
major role in shaping school and district priorities for professional
learning; there would be substantial opportunities for teachers to learn
from one another rather than solely from external experts; and teachers
would have some choice over the trajectories of their professional
learning. Much as significant learning for students comes through
long trajectories in which students spiral through cycles of mastery,
identity, and creativity, we need to create opportunities for teacher
learning to do the same. In addition to whatever collective professional
learning is organized by schools and districts, teachers also should be
able to propose topics that they want, or even need, to learn more about
and there should be sustained time for them to acquire this learning.
There is no shortage of potential models for how to achieve these
changes-the problem is not a technical one. The challenge is rather
that districts would have to change their mindset-seeing teachers less
as widgets to be slotted into their preexisting plans and more as talented
people who need opportunities to grow in directions that they them-
selves control and direct.54
If deeper learning were the goal, the approach to evaluation would
also need to change radically. Teachers in our study spoke bitterly about
how district administrators, who knew little about the content or con-
text of their lessons, would ding them because they didn't have the right
things on their bulletin boards or because what they taught in a given
fifteen-minute observation did not meet a pre-established rubric. The
issue here, again, is one of professional respect — there is no world where
a supervisor would watch fifteen minutes of a surgery or a trial and
make consequential decisions about a doctor's or lawyer's professional
performance. The current systems also focus more on individual per-
formance than on improving collective capacity. A more humane
system would remember that evaluation is just one small part of a much
larger project of developing people, and that a critical objective of
evaluation is to not alienate high-quality people whom the field needs
to recruit and develop. Again, there are professional systems of evalu-
ation, such as, for example, the ones used in many consulting firms-
in which the individual and the supervisor collectively define a set of
goals for the year, and a 3oo-degree evaluation system (relying on a wide
variety of different kinds of evidence) is used to pinpoint where there is
growth and where someone needs a leg up. None of this precludes396
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
dropping bad performers, but retaining employees and helping them
grow professionally are key to any school's long-term success, and
systems of evaluation should be developed accordingly.
Districts also have the power to open up opportunities and time for
deeper learning. If the goal were to provide students with more powerful
learning experiences more of the time, then students would likely need
to have more choice, more opportunities to work across disciplines, and
more chances to connect their learning to the world. Districts have the
power to make all of this possible. They could enable block scheduling,
give students more choice, expand electives, break down the silos
between disciplines, and broker connections between schools and a
variety of external learning opportunities.
Finally, districts cannot expect deeper learning to flourish without
exercising considerable skillful leadership. Most teachers teach as they
were taught, and most of our educational structures still bear the im-
print of their industrial-era origins. Thus creating change will require
significant leadership. While most teachers are not opposed to having
students think more or become more engaged, they need to see what it
would look like-so they need to be asked to change in manageably
sized chunks; and even so, many will need some outside support to make
even modest changes. Change is possible, and once teachers and stu-
dents begin to experience what it looks and feels like to do captivating
work, energy can snowball in a positive direction. But these changes
go against the grain, and will require vision and active leadership to
get started.
On Equity and Deeper Learning
One criticism leveled against progressive or constructivist approaches
to education is "that's fine for kids who come to school with significant
amounts of social and cultural capital, but for kids who don't have that
background, they need to learn it in school." While there is truth in
part of this observation-students do learn different amounts of dom-
inant cultural knowledge at home— much of what has followed from
this assumption in terms of educational practice has been harmful. This
line of thinking tends to foreground students' deficits over their assets;
it serves to justify teaching as transmission and what Paulo Freire calledVING
lem
and
for
ful
ed
nd
)S
a
t
MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
397
the "banking model" of education. Writ large, this line of thinking is
a powerful force for social reproduction— that is, no matter how well-
intentioned it is, the result in practice is that, yet again, the most privi-
leged students are being taught how to think whereas less advantaged
students, who are often students of color, are being taught how to follow
the directions of authorities.
Our time in schools persuaded us of the truth of something close to
the opposite proposition. For students who came with high levels of
dominant cultural capital, who were willing to follow rules, who were
either intrinsically interested in academic subjects or willing to play the
game of school to get to college, school as it currently stands is func- /
tional. As we've suggested, we think more could happen for these
students if school were remade, but the status quo works well enough
to get them to college. For the rest of students, however, the changes
we suggest are necessary to get them engaged in their education. For
example, we once witnessed a biology teacher teaching a fairly tradi-
tional class about DNA to two different sections of kids. The lesson
included some mini-lecture, some work with manipulables (strands that
the students could use to assemble DNA), and some worksheet ques-
tions. This was an experienced teacher—he was energetic, he was very
good at classroom management, and his lesson was clear and biologi-
cally accurate. And he was committed to equality: he taught exactly the
same lesson to his middle-track and lower-track students. The way this
lesson was received, however, varied greatly. The middle-track students
did what he asked— they dutifully listened to him lecture, manipulated
the strands when he told them to, and filled out the worksheet. The
lower-track students did not-despite a lot of skillful cajoling, they
looked out the window, and, in some cases, refused to do what he asked.
After both classes were over, he asked us for feedback. We don't have
any feedback on what you did, we said. Within the constraints of
what you were trying to do— a teacher-led lesson on DNA-you did it
about as well as it can be done. But, we asked, have you ever done any-
thing that has had more success, particularly with the lower-track
group of students? As it happens, he said, yes. To paraphrase, he said: I
teach this senior elective, where students get to pick the biological topic
they want to investigate, and they have to do research and create some
sort of product that reflects what they learned. Some of my students
who had their heads on their desks today were great in that setting.398
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
Our chapter on the most compelling teachers in our sample reached
similar conclusions. In math, science, English, and social studies or his-
tory, we found fundamentally similar approaches among our high-
challenge/high-engagement/high-participation teachers in their elite
and their highly disadvantaged settings. All of these teachers con-
structed powerful learning environments with clear purpose, and
supported students as producers, depth over breadth, disciplines as
open-ended rather than closed, and students playing the whole game
at a junior level. In settings where students had weaker reading or math
skills, teachers slowed down, focused on shorter pieces of text, and
included more scaffolds, but the fundamental approach was the same.
Some social studies teachers also drew upon the critical tradition—
critical approaches to race, gender, class and other subjects-and
found that this tradition contained within it a "deeper" approach to un-
derstanding social processes as well as a stance that was particularly
resonant for marginalized student populations. Thus while Lisa
Delpit's well-known work has been seen as arguing that different and
more-structured learning environments are appropriate for disadvan-
taged students and students of color, our research suggests that it is
precisely these students who would benefit most from an approach that
integrates mastery, identity, and creativity,57
To put it another way, these are often the students for whom tradi-
tional school has worked least well, who are most disengaged from
school, and whose interests and racial identities have been largely de-
nied by traditional school priorities. Thus, perhaps not surpris-
ingly, it is they who are most in need of a new approach. As Milbrey
McLaughlin and Joan Talbert describe it, "Nontraditional students ap-
pear to be more at home and successful as learners in classrooms where
teachers connect them to subjects in new ways. The students we in-
terviewed recognized and appreciated teachers' efforts to get to know
them and to create classroom settings that encouraged academic en-
gagement and expression of ideas. Yet nontraditional students de-
scribe most of their classes as highly structured, teacher-controlled
and regimented."59
Taking the perspective one step further, farsighted provinces like
British Columbia have begun actively to integrate the funds of knowl-
edge that exist in indigenous communities, which traditionally have
been marginalized by mainstream schooling. Through cultural ex-MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
399
change programs and by welcoming community elders as additional
adult mentors to students, British Columbia is actively trying to show
all students the varied traditions of powerful learning that exist in dif-
ferent communities. First People principles, for example, emphasize
learning by doing, apprenticeship learning, cross-generational learning,
and learning that is deeply informed by history. Deep learning exists
in many different registers. Schools of the future might incorporate
these varied registers, and, in so doing, both help to educate privileged
students about other cultures and create a sense of belonging and iden-
tity for students who historically have been marginalized.
There Is a Way, but Is There the Will?
As we put this book to bed in June of 2018, we are struck by the incon-
gruence between our interest in "deep learning" and the values of a
large segment of the American polity. The 2016 presidential election
of Donald Trump was not simply a routine swing of the ideological pen-
dulum; it represented the apotheosis of a certain brand of populist
politics that distrusts any form of expertise, is skeptical of science, and
is overtly hostile to people of color. Enlightenment values themselves
are under attack and anti-Enlightenment values- nativism, xenophobia,
distrust of reason and evidence have come to the forefront. Nor did
the election of Trump come out of nowhere. Rather, it is the culmina-
tion of trends that since the Igoos have been growing on the Right-
leading to a racially coded politics that is highly antagonistic toward
non-whites, skeptical about knowledge, dismissive of expertise, dis-
trustful of educated people, and enamored of authoritarian values as
the way to restore order and national greatness. Every element on this
list runs counter to the values that support "deeper learning."
For our purposes, these trends are particularly important because
public schools are public institutions. Education also has an underde-
veloped technical core—by which we mean a weak foundation of pro-
fessionally accepted definitions of the nature of the work and the ways
it should be carried out-which has made it particularly vulnerable to
changing public priorities. Thus, reforms that have succeeded — the cre-
ation of the public school system in the first place, standardized tests,
age-graded schooling, extracurricular activities, tracking—all have met400
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
the needs of teachers or parents or both. Reforms that have struggled-
particularly reforms, like those discussed in this book, that would
make education more intellectually lively and demanding— have failed
nationwide not only because they have not solved problems that teachers
think they have, but also because they have never built a public constitu-
ency powerful enough to establish them. At the same time, they have
succeeded in niches-either individual schools, or subsystems like Mon-
tessori, IB, or some progressive charter management organizations-
that have managed to build the needed political support among volun-
tary groups of parents and students. This perspective explains why such
education can thrive in specific communities, even when the national
political picture is unfavorable to deeper learning
If the changes that we have described here are to transpire, we see
no alternative but for public school leaders- governors, mayors, super-
intendents, principals, teachers, and even students-to make a loud,
sustained, and convincing case for deeper learning. Making schools
places where our children learn to think, where they create, where they
pursue things that matter to them, where they seize the skills that
will help them master their lives, should be an easy sell. But we recog-
nize that it is not. It can be seen as threatening for students not to learn
in the ways their parents were taught. Much as parents can fear sending
their children to college because they may end up rejecting the ways of
the parents, schools that aspire to deeper learning can similarly arouse
fear and skepticism in parents educated in a different way.61
An enormous amount depends on whether or not we can summon
the courage and the will to make this shift. Schools lay the foundation
of our economy and our path to equity— they train future workers and
(we hope) mitigate some of the inequalities of this generation by em-
powering the next. These are important purposes. But perhaps the most
important role they play is training our future citizens. These are people
who will need to be able to tell truth from fantasy, real news from fake
news; they will need to understand that climate change is real; and they
will need to be able to work with people from other countries to solve
the next generation of problems. If we cannot shift from a world where
learning deeply is the exception rather than the rule, more is in jeop-
ardy than our schools. Nothing less than our society is at stake.