R LEARNING
set of pre-
ight about
job of the
ers heads
g knowl-
growing
he skill
tabulary
hich he
re: "the
inded",
taposi-
udents
vocab-
ng the
words
ays as
at re-
how
imar
sally
ot of
; for
d to
ake
ent
ny
ed
to .
aS
t
DEEPER TEACHING
339
on the assumption that higher-order tasks will follow at some future
date-Mr. Hogan's approach was "Bloom as web," moving back and
forth between complex texts and the skill-building needed to deci-
pher and write about them.
Joel Wolf, William Duchin, and Megan Marino:
Scientific Inquiry
On a visit to an urban charter school early in our travels, the science
department chair, a woman in her mid-twenties, pulled us aside and
said, "If you really want to see deep learning, you should visit the school
where I went to high school-the Midwestern Math and Science
Academy la pseudonym]." MMSA, as we will call it, is an exam school
created by a governor and a Nobel Prize winner with a twofold mis-
sion-to educate some of the strongest math and science students in
the state, and to develop new approaches to schooling that could serve
as models for the state and the nation. We visited MMSA in 2013 for
seven research days, with a particular interest in how they approached
science instruction. While we realize that there are some who are skep-
tical of what can be learned from a selective magnet school (and the
school certainly benefits from the strong skills and motivation of its
students), we felt that this school had found particularly thoughtful
things to do with its students, perhaps generating ideas that could be
useful across the spectrum.
Part of what made MMSA distinctive was its strong constructivist
stance that students should be treated as inquirers who need to figure
things out for themselves. This was a consistent theme in our interviews
with both students and faculty. As one student said,
They don't just give you information and expect you to regurgi-
tate it—you have to develop things on your own. They encourage
discovering things. Like with math classes, at my previous school
they would give us the information and then have us give it back
to them on a test. Here they will give us [the material] and then
will ask you to draw your own conclusions based on the evidence
that you've gained— it gives you deeper understandings because
you understand the math behind it.340
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
Another student said that many of the questions on tests in science
were "transfer questions, where they change the scenario; you can't just
memorize it the day of; you need to know it and have a good under-
standing of it." In language, "Before you had to memorize vocab and
grammar; here it's all discussion and immersion based." From the
teachers' perspective, this was a huge shift from what the students were
used to in their previous schools. As one teacher told us, "The shift is
so hard to do- the first semester of sophomore year is like hell because
they come in, and they're like this is how I was successful for so many
years." The result is that "students can be uncomfortable early on
because their idea of what teachers are supposed to do is different from
what happens here. 'My teacher doesn't teach; they always answer ques-
tions with questions." Over time, both students and teachers said that
students adjusted, gradually becoming more comfortable with uncer-
tainty and the notion that knowledge is not given but constructed.
A significant part of helping students make this shift is a required
sophomore course called Methods of Scientific Inquiry (MST), which
is designed and taught by a team of teachers. The purpose of the course
is to teach students what it means to do scientific inquiry, and the goal is
for students to write a scientific paper that could be submitted to a
journal. Students begin by learning some basic statistics— how to run
a t-test, and how to test the relationship between x and y variables by
doing a correlation analysis or running a regression. Students then are
exposed to some of the scientific literature, because, as Joel Wolf, one
of the teachers of the course, says, "many of the students have not seen
or read the peer-reviewed professional literature," only textbooks.
Mr. Wolf and his colleagues then walk students through how to use da-
tabases to find things in the scientific literature. They do a simple lab
on buoyancy, the purpose of which is to show how to label axes of a
graph and put the dependent variable on the y axis and the indepen-
dent variable on the x axis. Thus in the first several months of school,
students learn the things they need to know, big and small, to at least
begin to write a scientific paper.
Then there is a scaffolded process of developing the research for the
paper. The first step is brainstorming— what are they interested in, what
data do they have access to or might they be able to collect? Mr. Wolf
helps to fine-tune the brainstorming process, helping students to figure
out what is "feasible or reasonable and what might not work." Then they
DE
pr
th
pr
st&
a s
tu'
ter
to
ac1
Tl
SCI
WC
eni
the
clu
the
ter
or$
stu
toy
he
a 1]
stu
tea
wh
list
stat
likt
theLEARNING
1 science
an't just
I under-
cab and
om the
its were
shift is
ecause
• many
rly on
t from
ques-
d that
ncer-
1.
lired
hich
urse
›al is
to a
run
; by
are
one
sen
ks.
la-
ab
1-
st
t
DEEPER TEACHING
34I
develop a project proposal, which Mr. Wolf describes as a critical step
in the process. Here they have to define the question, the methods they
will use, how they plan to analyze the data, as well as how they will ad-
dress "safety concerns and privacy issues." They also make a list of the
materials they will need for their project, and develop a timeline for
what they plan to do on specific days. Students submit a draft of this
proposal, which gets marked up by Mr. Wolf, then submit a revision
that responds to his questions.
The rest of the semester follows a similar pattern. Each step in the
project is closely structured, but students have full control over the sub-
stance of the experiment and the content of the paper. The elements of
a scientific paper are isolated introduction, literature review, data and
methods, findings, and discussion— and each piece has to be separately
turned in for feedback from Mr. Wolf. Some of the components are ex-
tensively scaffolded; for example, for the literature review, students have
to write an annotated bibliography of at least ten sources before they
actually try to integrate that research into their literature review.
The last steps are writing an abstract and a title. As Mr. Wolf de~
scribes the goal, "We talk about-like in an art class. Products of art
would be the painting, the sculpture, but what's that product of sci-
ence? It's that publication, and we want them to generate that paper at
the end that looks like a peer-review journal article." The project con-
cludes with students developing a poster for the project, and sharing
their results and conclusions with their classmates.
Over the years, students have chosen a wide range of topics. Mr. Wolf
remembers projects seeking to understand plant growth, comparing
organic and nonorganic apples, and a product-testing project where
students measured the absorption levels of different kinds of paper
towels. There also have been projects in the social sciences; for example,
he remembers one where a teacher delivered the same short lecture in
a monotone and then in a livelier way: the experimenters then gave
students a content assessment and asked them to rate the quality of the
teaching across the two versions. One group we observed was testing
whether students were more likely to remember lyrics of a song if they
listened to the song or were shown the lyrics visually. (They found no
statistically significant difference.) In a given year, some students would
likely be in the chemistry lab, some in the greenhouse, and some out in
the field, which avoided the problem of competing for scarce resources.342
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
The class generally has about twenty-four students, working in pairs,
meaning that Mr. Wolf is supporting twelve projects at once, which he
finds to be a significant but manageable workload, especially because
at any given stage of the process some students will need more help
than others.
These semester-long mini-projects sophomore year feed into the Stu-
dent Inquiry and Research program in junior and senior years. MMSA
gives over much of Wednesdays to these projects, which are larger sci-
entific investigations, either designed by the students on campus or in
college labs. The school has established partnerships with two well-
regarded universities for students to work in labs, and buses take stu-
dents back and forth to these labs on Wednesdays. The school has a
full-time coordinator for this program, who works to find mentors,
checks in with matches as they develop, and conducts site visits at the
labs and other off-campus sites where students are placed. Students
choose their projects; about 75 percent of these projects are in STEM,
but some students do work in other disciplines, including literature
(writing novels) and music (composition). As in the MSI course, the pro-
cess is scaffolded: students have to submit a proposal, keep notebooks
that document what they are learning, and present to the community
at the end of the year. Substantively, the projects here are more ambi-
tious. The year we visited, one student was running regressions on the
effects of homelessness; another was exploring whether the universal
declaration of human rights was truly universal; and a third, in a uni-
versity lab, was evaluating the effects of different drugs on heart dis-
ease. Roughly 5 to 1o percent of these projects are presented at research
conferences or are published. Students described the MSI course as
critical preparation for these larger projects: "Sophomore year was
big... in teaching us how to learn on our own; how to bring all dif-
ferent types of data together and synthesize and boil it down to prove
something."
Interestingly, the way that MSI was working during our visit wasn't
the way in which it had initially been envisioned. In its earlier itera-
tion, said Mr. Wolf, the skill-building part took most of the semester,
and the project happened only in the final three weeks. But when a team
conducted a review of the course, they found that students did not find
the skill-building part particularly engaging or relevant, because it was
divorced from the context in which it would be used:ARNING
a pairs,
hich he
secause
re help
he Stu-
VIMSA
yer sci-
1s or in
o well-
ke stu-
il has a
entors,
; at the
udents
TEM,
rature
le pro-
ebooks
nunity
ambi-
on the
iversal
a uni-
It dis-
search
urse as
ar was
ill dif-
prove
wasn't
itera-
lester,
1 team
st find
it was
DEEPER TEACHING
343
The students were not seeing the relevance to all of the skill-
building activities. They didn't understand why they were expected
to do all that stüff that didn't seem to have a context. ... The
project is what gives it context. When they're reading literature
they're reading literature because it's relevant to the research
that they're doing, and they're writing about it so that their con-
clusions can be understood in a broader context and not in isola-
tion, for example. Background can be given so that the reader of
their paper has some knowledge about their topic before they get
into the specifics of what they've learned. Now it has a context
and a meaning, and it's relevant to them, and they understand
how it fits in.
As a result, they had shortened the skill-building portion to just the
first few weeks of the course, then integrated additional tools through
the development of the scientific research. From Mr. Wolf's perspec-
tive, this shift not only had the benefit of making the work more en-
gaging; it also helped students to think more like scientists, for whom
integrating hypotheses, literature, data, and findings are the core tasks.
Thus the MSI example parallels the apprenticeship and induction ap-
proach that made the extracurriculars described earlier so powerful. It
draws on the motivation of students' intrinsic interest in their topics,
develops learning in a contextualized rather than a decontextualized
way, has a clear purpose, and is incentivized by a public presentation of
work at the end. At the same time, it also features ample feedback from
an experienced teacher and a carefully scaffolded process that helps stu-
dents gradually gain the tools they need to conduct real scientific re-
search. There is "playing the whole game at the junior level" in the MSI
project, followed by the gradual move toward becoming part of the
larger community of scientists, as students become more experienced
and many join college labs. Much as Mr. Hogan did with English lan-
guage arts, the building of basic skills is subsumed within a larger arc
that has meaning and purpose.
What was it about Mr. Wolf and his fellow science teacher Duchin
(known on campus as Dr. Duchin) that enabled them to construct this
are for their students? Mr. Wolf said that the model for his teaching
stemmed from the part of his own educational career that looked most
like real science: "Another interesting thing is —I think back at my own344
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
education. It wasn't until I did an independent study in my senior year
that I really got involved in doing some of the kinds of things that we
ask the students to do in the MSI class, my senior year in college. I really
didn't get good exposure to a lot of stuff until I became a grad student
and started doing research of my own. That was a whole different ex-
perience than all the coursework that I had taken prior to that."
Dr. Duchin, who also taught MSI and had been a fixture at MMSA for
several decades, described the way his own doctoral training shaped his
teaching: "I suppose, if I didn't go to graduate school, I wouldn't be the
same person I am. I'm a constructivist, because that's the training that
I have. I practiced constructing models that reflect the data that I
collected. I can't separate that experience from who I am now, as a
teacher of these kids."!s Many of the teachers at MMSA have Ph.D.'s in
their subjects, and it was this exposure to building and creating knowl-
edge themselves that had enabled them to apprentice students into a
similar mode.
MMSA's schoolwide commitment to inquiry-oriented teaching dra-
matically shortened the period of trial and error that characterized the
first years of many of our other teachers. Dr. Duchin describes initially
coming to MMSA after working for a few years as an adjunct lecturer
on the college circuit, and finding a fit between his beliefs about the
subject and his beliefs about teaching. "In college, I'm a lecturer. I'm
supposed to communicate the theory, the concept, the thought pattern
of the discipline, and then test students on it. Here, I came to discover
very early that it was a constructivist atmosphere, not an instructivist
one. It appealed to me tremendously, particularly in my career, coming
out of science, which is constructivist. It just seemed to make sense that
we should educate our science students in a constructivist manner. It
was a good fit for me." In an environment filled with students and col-
leagues who had similar beliefs, Dr. Duchin had many opportunities
to grow and reshape his teaching in a supportive environment.
Megan Marino was trying to do something similar but in a much less
privileged environment. After earning a Ph.D. in chemistry with a focus
on science education, Ms. Marino had been teaching in a large, com-
prehensive, traditional public high school in a Northeastern city. Most
of her students were African American or Latinx, and they were almost
uniformly recipients of free or reduced-price lunch. One of the classes
that we observed her teaching was a Methods of Scientific Inquiry class:
D
ti
C
t
- •~UNG
ear
we
illy
ent
ЭX-
t."
lis
he
at
a
a
DEEPER TEACHING
345
Ms. Marino has told me that this class is an eleventh- and twelfth-
grade elective, which functionally means that it's a "dumping ground"
for students whose schedules put them in the time slot. She says that
there is a huge range of skills and interests but "that's the point-I don't
care if students start by thinking of themselves as science students
or not."
The sun streams through the tall windows on one side of the room. Even
with the blinds partially closed I can see the city skyline to the west of
the school. The students have been working on corrosion; yesterday they
did an experiment and have brought in their results. Class begins imme-
diately with the bell. There are about twenty students in the room. Most
appear to be black or Latinx with three who appear to be white and one
boy in ROTC uniform who appears to be Middle Eastern. Ms. Marino says
that the students will be continuing their steel wool experiments from the
day before-they will be designing a second experiment based on the re-
sults of the first. "You're going to come up with a new question based
on what you see, based on what is interesting to you," she continues,
and asks students to take out their notebooks and their handouts from
yesterday. She prompts students to look at the post-lab questions,
briefly explains the plan for the class, and says that she will be checking
homework. The students get going within five minutes of the bell. "You
are going to do the same things that you did for the first experiment...
create a question, identify your variables." They have done a little back-
ground work about rusting before the lab (they read an article), but Ms.
Marino tells me that "I'm more of an explore-first kind of teacher, so
the pre-work was pretty sparse." She gives me the article, which pro-
vides some basic information about corrosion in the context of dis-
cussing vintage cars and how they rust differently in different parts of
the country.
There is a one-page outline of instructions for the lab. In Phase 1,
students could choose one of three questions to explore-the first ques-
tion, for example, is "How does water temperature affect the rate of
corrosion of steel wool?" Then they had to identify the variables (and
check with Ms. C before moving on), state a hypothesis, create a mate-
rials list, write a detailed
procedure (check with Ms. C), carry it out, and
record results. Today, in Phase 2, they are to design a follow-up experi-
ment based on what was most interesting in their first results. The follow-
up questions are as follows:346
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
1) What does your original experiment show about the relationship
between your dependent and independent variables? Answer this
question for both experiments.
2) Comment on your hypothesis in light of your results.
3) Explain your thinking around your follow-up experiment. What
about your original results led you to choose the particular
follow-up experiment?
4) Explain why corrosion happens more quickly under some condi-
tions than others, according to your experiment. This should in-
clude a discussion of the chemical reactions involved in corrosion
and how the conditions affect this reaction.
The students immediately move from their desks to spaces around the
room, checking on their results. I talk to a pair of girls, one with long black
hair and a slight lisp who tells me that she is part of the science mentors
program, the other with a messy bun. They tell me that they picked the
question about which liquid or solution resulted in the fastest corrosion.
They tested water, vinegar, and lemon juice, and show me the test tubes
where they have put the samples of steel wool with these solutions. They
have hypothesized that water will corrode the wool the most "because
water is polar and steel isn't …. that's just what we thought." | ask how they
will know about the levels of corrosion and they say just by looking-
but when I come back later they have decided to measure the mass of
the steel wool.
Ms. Marino is talking to a pair who is having a hard time deciding on a
second experiment-a Latina girl and a black girl. They chose to look at
how salt water, regular water, and vinegar corroded the steel wool by mea-
suring the mass of the wool before and after it soaked in the solutions.
The salt water didn't change the mass of the wool, as they had thought it
might. Ms. Marino says, "It's up to you-you could even decide to dupli-
cate the same experiment with different solutions," she adds. "Because,
would we ever decide we know for sure with just one experiment?" They
shake their heads. When I follow up a few minutes later, they tell me that
they've decided to design a new experiment to see if higher concentra-
tions of salt will result in greater corrosion. I ask why, and they say, "Water
is everywhere, so it's related to real life-so we'd know what would happen
if metal was in the ocean." When I ask why they think in this pair of labs
students are designing different experiments rather than all following the
DEEPE
same
get to
The
goggl
rino s
puts
weigh
with A
Throu
which
struct
noteb
that t
work.
to thi!
for or
уеаг.
At 1
dents
Marin
who d
to hav
on the
puter
герог
Th
advan
meth
are ev
what
doing
tific p
in oth
the st
some
make
theiriVING
ship
this
hat
di-
in-
on
he
ck
rs
le
п.
'У
e
f
DEEPER TEACHING
347
same procedure, one of them says, "Well this is an elective class so we
get to choose what we want to do."
The feeling in the room is busy but focused. Many students wear safety
goggles without seeming self-conscious about it; at some point Ms. Ma-
rino says to a student, "Dear, I need you to wear your goggles," and he
puts them on without fuss. All students are engaged in measuring,
weighing, taking notes, talking about the experiments, or conversing
with Ms. Marino or Tiffany, a former student who works as an assistant.
Throughout, when I ask students questions about the experiments-like
which solution they originally thought would be the most corrosive- I'm
struck by the fact that many of them look uncertain and check their
notebooks rather than responding extemporaneously. My impression is
that this is the effect of their general lack of confidence in this kind of
work. They don't seem to have the big picture, that this is about learning
to think like a scientist, but they are doing so nevertheless- my guess is
for one of the first times. It is also October, still relatively early in the
year.
At the end of the period Ms. Marino prompts clean-up, and all the stu-
dents put their labeled experiments-in-progress on the windowsill. Ms.
Marino gives a few reminders: she checked notebooks today so anyone
who didn't get checked needs to show her theirs. "By tomorrow we need
to have our follow-up experiments completely set up and we'll be working
on the analysis questions. Later in the week we'll have time in the com-
puter lab to work on processing some of this and formatting it as a lab
report."
This class reveals what an inquiry-oriented stance looks like in a less
advantaged setting. As at MMSA, students are employing the scientific
method, have some control over the nature of their investigations, and
are evaluating their hypotheses through evidence. While they are some-
what unsure of their footing, given that this is their first exposure to
doing real science, they are able to work through the steps of the scien-
tific process. The room also shares the affective qualities we have seen
in other powerful classrooms—a hum of busy focus that is driven by
the students. It is also notable that it is an elective-students, freed of
some of the coverage constraints of other science classrooms, can
make some choices about what they investigate, which helps to pique
their interest. Finally, unlike many of the scientific labs we saw —where348
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
the purpose was to replicate existing experiments-there was in this
room a genuine sense of the unpredictability that characterizes real
science, as students tried different materials to arrive at their results.
The experimental work was also linked to underlying content in
chemistry, creating the basis for the conclusions of the experiments.
Like the other teachers profiled, Ms. Marino had made a series of
decisions that produced the classroom we saw. Because the class is an
elective for juniors and seniors, it is not subject to state tests. As a teacher
with a strong reputation within a school with loose administrative
oversight, Ms. Marino also had significant autonomy in designing the
course. She had, over time, decided that certain ideas and associated
procedures within chemistry that she initially had held dear could be
sacrificed in favor of greater conceptual understanding of core ideas,
while inducting students into the use of the scientific method. As a
result, she had made participating in the science fair a required com-
ponent of the course, and threaded development of the science fair
project through the learning across the year.
Pedagogically, she had taken the task of scientific inquiry and broken
it into many components. One strategy she used, especially early in the
year, was that on the first day she would design an experiment, which
students would carry out; then they would design the follow-up experi-
ment. In so doing, she both actively demonstrated the steps of the sci-
entific method and gave students some freedom to develop their own
ideas. The science fair project was the culmination of this evolution, as
she gradually gave over responsibility to the students to take charge of
their own scientific explorations. Much as Mr. Fields hoped that each
discussion of a text would produce something new, Ms. Marino
similarly thought that the key was for students not to feel as if they
were the thousandth student to perform an experiment but rather that
they were investigating something original. Creating choice over the
science fair project was one part of this-"if you hate cooking but love
sports, don't pick a project on sugar crystallization," she said — but even
in day-to-day instruction, she thought that students making choices
gave the work life. "That whole idea of really asking students to kind
of come at it from who they are. I think every student is more engaged
in a lesson if they think it's different because they're there. Because
they're taking part in it; that [their presence] has somehow changed
what has happened," she told us.
DEEPEF
At t
induct
she als
ways t
my pel
goals i
she ser
active
has ar
skills,
growin
Lamps
gradua
As t
been :
learne
teachi
high s
for ma
cation
who w
teachi
did he
runni
scienci
search
search
level 1
inforn
Ms.
methc
things
of the
if you
other
correc
cult. )
okay.ARNING
in this
es real
esults.
ent in
nts.
ies of
is an
icher
ative
; the
ated
1 be
eas,
iS a
•m-
air
en
i-
i-
S
DEEPER TEACHING
349
At the same time, while Ms. Marino placed a heavy emphasis on
inducting students into the methods and epistemology of real science,
she also made sure to integrate a core knowledge of chemistry: "I al-
ways tell kids and I mean it. I see the world in chemistry. It organizes
my perspective, my vision on the world," she said. One of Ms. Marino's
goals is for students to become scientifically literate, and to achieve that,
she seeds an accumulating series of chemistry lessons within her largely
active approach to teaching. Much as the National Research Council
has argued that deeper understanding requires fusing content with
skills, Ms. Marino believed that scientific inquiry is necessarily built on a
growing base of scientific knowledge. At the same time, as Magdalene
Lampert does in math, she would often foreground an investigation, then
gradually bring in the scientific content, rather than the reverse.
As with many of our other teachers, coming to teach this way had
been an evolution. Ms. Marino described herself as someone who
learned well from the book, the traditional way, and she had begun her
teaching in a rather conventional manner. When she began teaching
high school, however, she quickly discovered that this did not work
for many of her students. While completing a master's degree in edu-
cation, she struck up a relationship with her science methods professor,
who was beginning a large NSF-funded grant on inquiry-based science
teaching. Ms. Marino became a doctoral student on this project, and
did her own research comparing more and less inquiry-based ways of
running labs. At the same time, she got her Ph.D. in chemistry, not
science education, and thus had to complete some bench chemistry re-
search as well. This combination had both grounded her in doing re-
search in the discipline and given her an opportunity to do dissertation-
level research about different teaching practices. These experiences
informed the work she was doing with her own students.!7
Ms. Marino now teaches others who are trying to learn inquiry-based
methods of teaching science. Her key piece of advice? "One of the first
things is be not afraid. It is a little messier. ... Push yourself to let go
of the idea of a very tight kind of classroom control and have faith that
if you kind of give students the reins that it will be okay." Much like
other teachers in our sample, she embraces the value of growth over
correctness: "One of my other refrains to kids is, 'It is hard. It is diffi-
cult. You shouldn't feel bad. It takes time and repeated effort and that's
okay. Everything we do, every effort you provide is advancing you350
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
towards the ultimate goal even if you're not there yet. Even if you get
the wrong answer, it doesn't mean that it was a waste.?'" As was true at
Attainment High, she noted that this message is counter-cultural to
what students normally receive, and that it requires some unlearning
on their part to get used to it.
Like a coach, Ms. Marino employs a variety of methods to acclima-
tize students to this new way of being. For example, she refuses to grade
the multiple-choice sections of tests if students have not taken a
real shot at doing the open-response sections. Because she has found
that some students freeze up at the writing stage of developing lab re-
ports, she urges them to first talk out their ideas, then write down
their thoughts. A central goal of her teaching is to build a culture in
which students try out scientific ideas with one another, ultimately
making them responsible for creating and regulating a space infused
with scientific norms.
In line with Dewey, who urged that the teacher should be an active
researcher of her own practice, and a reformist superintendent who in
1893 advocated teacher learning so that students could "drink from a
running stream rather than from a stagnant pool," Ms. Marino frequently
adjusted and experimented with her own practice.l8 Unlike the teachers
at MMSA, she was not part of a school committed to the kind of teaching
she was employing, so she did not have the benefit of the kind of com-
munity that they had on-site. As a result she eschewed most schoolwide
discussions and focused on her classroom. In her city, however, she had
found a community of people who shared similar missions and goals:
through this community she both shared what she learned, and learned
from others' shared experiences. In particular, through videotaping her-
self teaching and asking a group of friends from across her networks to
provide feedback, she continued to strengthen her own teaching.
What Do These Teachers Do Differently?
These teachers differed from their more traditional colleagues in a va-
riety of interlinked ways. They had a different conception of their pur-
pose (the why), which in turn was linked to a different teacher identity
(the who), which in turn was linked to a different set of pedagogical
choices (the what and how).
DEI
Tal
-
Edi
Ped
Vie
Vie
Rol
Rohi
Vie-
Eth
wha
infc
the
kno
our
tow:
to t]
of t1
caps
The
The
diffe
thei
they
but :
tant
want
uatic
worl
abouSING
get
e at
to
ng
la-
a
1
DEEPER TEACHING
35I
Table 7.I A Different Stance: Traditional versus "Deeper" Teachers
Traditional teachers
Educational goal
Cover the material
Pedagogical priorities
View of knowledge
View of students
Role of student
Role of teacher
View of failure
Ethos
Breadth
Certain
Extrinsically motivated
Receiver of knowledge
Dispenser of knowledge
Something to be avoided
Compliance
"Deeper" teachers
Do the work of the field;
inspire students to
become members
of the field
Depth
Uncertain
Creative, curious,
and capable
Creator of knowledge
Facilitator of learning
Critical for learning
Rigor and joy
Tying these together was a different stance, a different way of viewing
what they were trying to do, which came out of their experiences and
informed their work. While leading work by Lee Shulman emphasizes
the different sorts of knowledge that teachers possess-substantive
knowledge, pedagogical knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge—
our work suggests that it is the perspective or stance that teachers take
toward their work that is critical!' (Knowledge certainly contributes
to the formulation of such a stance, but it is not sufficient. 29) A number
of the key dimensions of this stance and how they fit together are en-
capsulated in Table 7.I.
The Why: How Deeper Teachers See Their Purpose
The starting point for understanding these teachers is that they had a
different view from most teachers of what they were trying to do with
their students. At essence, they began with a set of goals about what
they wanted for the young people in their charge—not just knowledge,
but a set of capacities and dispositions that they thought were impor-
tant for facing the world. They sought to empower their students; they
wanted them to be able to approach both their fields and other life sit-
uations as people who could act on the world and not simply have the
world act on them.
While their hopes for the students as people came first, they cared
about their students through their disciplines or subjects. In other words,352
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
in contrast to the role of parents, as teachers they expressed love
for their students by showing them the corner of the world that in-
spired them. In so doing, they hoped to modestly but fundamentally
change their charges, helping them to develop new interests, new
understandings, and, potentially, new identities that would integrate
what they were learning into revised notions of their core selves.21
Their goals were at once both less and more ambitious than those of
other teachers we encountered: less ambitious in that they were less.con-
cerned with whether students remembered particular pieces of content;,
and more ambitious in that they hoped to create seminal learning expe-
riences that would affect their students beyond the specific content of
the course: they tried to plant seeds that might inspire many years of
inquiry into their subject.
This approach reflected the different way in which these teachers un-
derstood their disciplines. To a person, they saw their disciplines as
open-ended rather than close-ended fields, meaning that they saw their
fields as places where people had constructed provisional knowledge,
rather than as places where there was a finished set of answers that
needed to be passed on or "professed" to others.
While teachers' epistemological understandings of their disciplines
might seem like an arcane point, we found that it was critical for every-
thing that followed. If teachers saw their fields as fixed or inherited
bodies of knowledge, teaching as transmission seemed like a logical and
efficient approach. Students might be given opportunities to process
more interactively, but the fundamental goal was to push students to
absorb established knowledge. Conversely, if the fields were understood
as places where different people would develop different interpretations,
experiments, and approaches to problems, it seemed natural to invite
students into this process of inquiry, connecting them to the genera-
tions of scholars and seekers of knowledge who had come before.
At the same time, even while teachers were giving their students
room to develop their own approaches and interpretations, they were
pushing them to think hard about how they would defend the argu-
ments that they were making. The teachers loved their fields and dis-
ciplines, and with that love came a belief in the way those disciplines
embodied standards about which arguments passed muster and which
did not. They indicated this through their feedback, both verbal and
written, and by the standards that governed what happened in their
DEEPER
classes
standa:
owned
ously p
with o
inferer
some s
and as
appros
ticula
"I do /
goal o:
dents :
In n
that w
Much
"game
in wh
ties. N
his sti
five-p
to ma
at MI
scale,
pate j
in a 1
philo
think
this 1
profe
powe
and c
Tl
teach
were
recei
heav:
theirEARNING
ed love
hat in-
entally
iS, new
tegrate
elves. 21
lose of
is.con-
ntent;
expe-
ent of
irs of
sun-
85 as
heir
dge,
that
nes
ry-
ted
nd
ESS
to
od
IS,
te
DEEPER TEACHING
353
classes. When possible, they tried to teach students to enforce these
standards, making the task of rigor something that was collectively
owned. In English classes, for example, students would often be vigor-
ously prompted to support interpretations with particular pieces of text,
with other students asked to evaluate whether they thought those
inferences were warranted. In math, it could come through assigning
some students to present problems that they had solved on the board,
and asking others to verify their chains of logic. If the conventional
approach to instruction is "I do / we do / you do" with respect to a par-
ticular piece of content or skill, the approach of these teachers was
"I do / we do/ you do" with respect to the standards of the field; with the
goal of gradually shifting responsibility for the learning itself to the stu-
dents as a collective. 22
In many ways, these teachers were paralleling the induction processes
that we saw in theater and other extracurriculars in the previous chapter.
Much of what they were trying to do was to close the gap between the
"game of school" way of approaching the field or discipline and the way
in which professional participants in those fields do those same activi-
ties. Mr. Hogan, for example, used the Ta-Nehisi Coates article to show
his students that good, real-world writers did not always conform to the
five-paragraph essay form that they had been taught, then invited them
to make similar authorial choices in their own work. The instructors
at MMSA walked students through the scientific process on a small
scale, then connected them to college labs where they could partici-
pate in the creation of real science. Even when students were not yet)
in a position to contribute to the field-for example, in math and
philosophy-their teachers tried to induct them into the kind of/
thinking and methodology that disciplinary experts employ. They did
this not because they thought that all of their students woüld become
professionals in these disciplines, but rather because it was a way of em-
powering their students; showing them that they, too, could develop
and create knowledge and ideas.
These commitments were particularly apparent in teachers who were
teaching high-poverty students and students of color. These teachers
were well aware that these were the students who historically had not
received an empowering education, and they saw their missions as
heavily shaped by a commitment to social justice. But they did not frame
their students in deficit terms; nor did they, like many of the teachers354
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
in our sample, see the urgency of "catching students up on the basics"
as precluding the kind of thinking that they wanted for their students.
Instead, they made sensible adjustments-shortening the pieces of
text they asked students to read; scaffolding unfamiliar terms or
concepts; embedding skill-building within larger investigations-
but kept their fundamental stance toward students as highly capable
meaning-makers.
These teachers also had a different view of expertise than is some-
times found in the literature. Much of the literature, especially in cog-
nitive science, emphasizes the importance of the differences between
experts and novices: experts can see patterns that novices cannot, and
thus the role of teaching is to use this expertise to help bring novices
along a trajectory toward expertise 23 These teachers did not deny that
they had greater expertise in their subjects than their students, but their
stance was rather one of co-investigators. As Dr. Duchin describes
it, "What developed for me was a subject-centered learning commu-
nity. I have to be part of the learning community, not that intercessor
between the content and the students. I think that's where the truth
comes out, and students know it." These teachers were hoping that as
a text was analyzed, an experiment conducted, a proof worked out,
their students would come up with something they hadn't seen, that
new ideas would be unearthed. Having sought to inspire their charges
to love their subjects, they welcomed having others with whom they
could explore their fields.
The Who: Teachers' Journeys and Identities
This stance, in turn, was heavily shaped by the life trajectories and
identities of those teachers. As we noted at the outset, all but one of the
teachers in our sample had been teaching at least ten years; the median
level of experience was twenty years. They had reached their stance only
after a considerable journey, with their sense of what matters most for
teaching as well as their hopes for young people crystallizing over a long
period.
Many of the teachers in our sample had started teaching in the tra-
ditional way-cover content, assess results, batch-process students,
rinse and repeat-and had gradually come to see the limits of that
method, which had motivated a search for a new approach. Ms. Walsh,R LEARNING
he basics"
• students.
pieces of
terms or
gations-
y capable
is some-
y in cog-
between
not, and
novices
eny that
ut their
scribes
mmu-
ccessor
; truth
that as
d out,
L, that
larges
I they
and
f the
dian
only
for
ong
ra-
ItS,
nat
sh,
DEEPER TEACHING
355
the IB teacher at IB High, recalled that her very first experience was
teaching on a Fulbright in Malaysia. Around October of her first year,
she said, one of her students came up to her and said, "Miss, you seem
like a very nice lady, but you have to stop talking!" She described this
somewhat sobering encounter as the beginning of her journey into how
students were experiencing her teaching, which had so evolved that, by
the time we saw her twenty years later, she was hardly talking at all.
Many of the teachers had made similar journeys. This was not an easy
shift—it required destabilizing their initial conception of what they
were supposed to do as professionals— so the evolution toward this
approach could take a long period of reflection, as they gradually came
to hold a different view of their role. 24
While it may have taken time for them to find a teaching equilib-
rium, they generally credited a seminal learning experience for shaping
how they viewed their field or purpose. For some, this had come in the
last two years of college or in graduate school, which was the time in
their own schooling when they had finally shifted from being told in-
formation acquired by others to participating in the development of
knowledge. 25 For the humanities teachers, it came from participating
in Socratic seminars or other joint meaning-making activities in their
own schooling, which they sought to pass on to their students. If Dan
Lortie emphasized the ways in which the apprenticeship of observation
was normally a conservative force that replicated transmission-style
teaching, our teachers suggested that the opposite is also possible:
drawing on the best experiences of schooling could provide models for
a different kind of teaching.
One particularly striking instance of this relationship between how
teachers learned their fields and how they taught them came in a dis-
cussion we had with a teacher in an advantaged school who was teaching
both history and AP psychology. We had visited her history class, which,
while not perfect, had given students opportunities to interact with
documents and try to develop historical interpretations. We had also
visited her AP psychology class, which had none of the life of the his-
tory class, because students were being asked to memorize definitions
of different kinds of conditioning. As we interviewed her to probe the
reasons for the differences between these classes, we asked how she saw
the two disciplines. To paraphrase, she said that history is very much
an open discipline. People think it's all names and facts, but it's not.356
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
Why do you say that? we asked. In college, she said, we had this two-
year required course in Western Civilization, co-taught by four pro-
fessors, in history, English, theology, and philosophy, and we got to see
how the same events could be understood through different lenses.
What about psychology, we asked? Oh, she said, unlike history, psy-
chology is all about right answers, it is a very closed discipline. From
these starkly different answers we can see that even in the same person,
very different teaching can result from very different understandings
of various fields or disciplines. 26 Perhaps not surprisingly, given our ap-
prenticeship view of powerful teaching and learning, it was only when
teachers had themselves experienced the nature of their disciplines as
open or constructed that they could create the same experience for their
students.
Depth of knowledge about their fields was also important for other
reasons. All of our most compelling teachers had at least an undergrad-
uate degree in their subject, with some who had masters' or even
doctoral degrees. This depth of knowledge helped them think about
how to structure the work in their fields; in particular, it helped them to
decide which readings, questions, or problems would be likely to open
up the widest range of possibilities for their students. It also was criti-
cally important for giving them confidence in their ability to teach in
• more open-ended ways; for other teachers in our study, moving off-
script or asking open-ended questions felt perilous because it could
expose the limitations in their knowledge of their fields. These teachers,
by contrast, were hoping that students' questions and ideas would take
them to unfamiliar territories, confident in their ability to handle such
terrain because they were secure in their underlying knowledge of the
field. Ironically, as students in Mr. Fields's philosophy class told us, when
teachers admitted that they didn't know everything, students thought
more, not less, of them.
If the roots of these teachers' approach to teaching were deeply
grounded in their initial learning in their fields, they were sustained
by an ongoing passion for their subjects and for finding ways to teach
them. The humanities teachers were voracious readers, continuing to
explore different tributaries of their subjects. Mr. Fields had recently
been ordained as a Buddhist priest, which was the culmination of a sus-
tained multiyear interest in Buddhism. Mr. Hogan said that he saw
everything in his life-movies, television shows, books, magazines,R LEARNING
this two-
four pro-
got to see
it lenses.
ory, psy-
le. From
person,
andings
our ap-
y when
lines as
or their
other
rgrad-
• even
about
em to
open
criti-
ch in
off-
ould
len
ght
sly
ed
DEEPER TEACHING
357
even advertisements-as texts carrying messages that could be decon-
structed; he was always on alert for materials that he could bring into
the classroom. Mr. Collins continued to love to do what he called "rec-
reational math," which he then shared with his students. Students, not
surprisingly, could sense the ways in which these fields were alive in
their teachers, describing this passion and interest as "contagious."
If part of their identity was continued immersion in doing the work
of their fields or disciplines, these teachers were also equally alive in
thinking through the work of teaching, constantly tinkering with and
revising aspects of their practice as they tried to figure out what would
land well with their students. Much as Dewey described teaching as a
form of action research, these teachers were continually experimenting
in ways small and large. In so doing, they stayed plugged into new cur-
rents developing in their fields and disciplines, considering whether
these approaches would work for them and their students. For some,
this was facilitated by technology and the growth of online teacher
communities; for others, by colleagues or critical friends in their geo-
graphic areas. Much as we have described deep learning for students as
occurring over long periods of time in spirals of mastery, identity, and
creativity, these teachers were part of similar cycles as they enriched
their teaching. Such cycles also sustained these teachers, preventing
the kind of burnout that is so common in more structured teaching
situations.
Finally, there was an interaction between these teachers' growing
sense of what mattered for their students, their understanding of their
fields, and their pedagogical approaches. Initially, for many of these
teachers, these elements had been misaligned: the ways they were
teaching felt incongruent with their own views of their fields, and
while they were meeting external expectations for their students (for
instance, by keeping up with pacing guides), their own assessment of
what their students were learning fell short of their expectations. Over
time, as they gained experience or tracked student outcomes over
time (including the years after students left their classrooms), they
had come to realize that less really was more-that more important
than what was covered was developing students' abilities to think and
to take ownership of the tools of their field or discipline. This real-
ization enabled them to shift their goals and to some degree their cur-
riculum, which in turn enabled them to develop pedagogical practices358
INSPIRIN
LACTIN
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
consistent with both their hopes for students and their views of their
fields or disciplines. While they continued to iterate and revise, part of
what was striking about these teachers was the way in which they had
ound an equilibrium that integrated their knowledge, their teaching,
and their selves.
The What and How: Inducting Students into the Disciplines
The ways in which these teachers taught were highly varied. Consis-
tent with the aphorism from the National Research Council report-
"asking which teaching technique is best is analogous to asking which
tool is best— a hammer, a screwdriver, a knife, or pliers" —the peda-
gogical approaches that these teachers employed differed depending
on their disciplines, goals, and teaching philosophies.2 Some, like
Mr. Fields, used essentially only one modality, which had the advan-
tage that students knew how they were going to be working and could
both focus on the content and gradually assume ownership of the pro-
cess. Others, like Mr. Hogan and Mr. Collins, varied the pedagogical
modalities depending on what they were teaching and what method
would best suit that task.
If the pedagogical modes varied, what was common in their approaches
was that they aimed to be simultaneously inspiring and exacting. All of
them saw their fields as something worthy-of considerable devotion,
something that could be this way for everyone, if, as Mr. Collins said,
the obstacles to such devotion were removed. But at the same time, they
also all had high standards for what good work in their fields looked like,
and they instantiated those standards by asking hard questions and by
requiring students continually to revise and revise both their thinking
and their written work.
In many ways, their classes exemplified many of the same qualities
that were present in the extracurriculars: purpose, choice, community,
apprenticeship, and the sense of "playing the whole game at the junior
level." As in theater, classes were grounded in an attention-grabbing
purpose or question: How do we know if we exist? How many breaths
would it take to blow up a huge balloon? Under what circumstances is
it appropriate to say "nigger"? What do we want to investigate scien-
tifically? Within this overarching purpose, there was often choice:
Mr. Fields let students start with the passages that meant something toNING
heir
tof
had
ng,
S-
-
h
DEEPER TEACHING
359
them; the Methods of Scientific Inquiry classes let students choose what
they wanted to explore and how they would design an experiment to
explore it. The work happened within a community that the teachers
had expertly created, one that was playful and productive, warm in af-
fect but focused in energy. Students knew the rules and norms of how
the space worked, so they could push one another on things large and
small, such as reminding classmates to put on their goggles or pressing
them to refer to texts.
All of this happened within the context of apprenticeship and playing
the whole game at the junior level: the teachers, as the expert guides to
the field, were gradually showing students how their domains worked,
with students learning by doing the work of the domain. In taking this
stance, teachers emphasized learning over performance; failure was not
something to be avoided but rather an expected part of striving toward
the difficult tasks of thinking and creation. Finally, all of these classes
shared a culture of respect for students as capable and intelligent young
people, whose opinions and ideas had real value, and where challenging
those ideas was a sign of intellectual seriousness.
These teachers also had a distinctive approach to choices about time
and coverage. Most teachers we saw were highly concerned with what
was covered, and would rush or lecture if they worried that they were
"falling behind" their expected goals. The teachers featured in this
chapter, by contrast, were more concerned with whether students were y
adopting the habits and dispositions of inquirers in their disciplines,
Thus when students became particularly interested in an idea or ques-
tion, the teachers saw that as a critical opportunity to ignite learning
rather than as a threat to subject-coverage goals. For example, a teacher
who teaches American history to predominantly poor black and Latinx
students in a prominent urban center remembers that he had been
taught to teach in what he calls "developmental" lessons, where you ask
students a series of questions that leads to a preset destination- whatever
points you, the teacher, want to get across about the topic. He re-
members clearly that one day a mentor asked him to try something
different-it was an elective on popular culture, and the item in ques-
tion was the Michael Jackson video Thriller-by soliciting students'
ideas rather than leading them to his planned conclusions about the
video. The ensuing discussion had a kind of life and energy that was
absent from classes with his previous approach. This discovery became360
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
the beginning of a long teaching journey, in which he gradually
learned the techniques of how to run a classroom discussion, how to
honor students' interests while also integrating core content, and how to
balance breadth and depth. As part of this shift, he had found that
when students got particularly interested in a subject-such as, for ex-
ample, the founding fathers and slavery—it served him well to go into
those topics in depth, creating opportunities for students to take more
ownership over their reading, writing, and analyses.
Ted Sizer once said that "to change anything, you need to change
everything,"28 These teachers had taken that point to heart. In partic-
ular, they had not created greater purpose or engagement through some
magical teaching technique; rather they had changed the pacing and
the goals of their courses in ways that were more congenial to their
induct-into-the-disciplines approach. Specifically, they had prioritized
depth over breadth, they had given students some choice, and they had
picked topics that they thought would appeal, in different ways, to the
adolescent mind. To create these departures, they had to find ways to
buffer themselves from external expectations. Some did this by teaching
in the elective curriculum, some did it by moving to schools like MMSA
that were supportive of these approaches, while some were simply so
beloved by students and parents that they had enough political clout to
do things differently. All sought out situations that were not monitored
by external tests. Thus while a big part of becoming a compelling
teacher was building empowering classrooms with students, an equally
important part was creating the political space to redesign their courses.
D
ti
0
e
S1
C
a
e
ic
d
a
VI
d
SI
tl
fi
tl
ar
sC
bi
These teachers show what is possible in high school education. Working
in settings ranging from the country's most elite state academies to its
highest-poverty urban public schools, they demonstrate how teachers
can create spaces that enable students to become knowledgeable, skillful,
and deeply invested in the core academic disciplines.
The cases in this chapter also show how difficult it will be to achieve
such outcomes. These teachers had each undertaken significant per-
sonal journeys to reach their present teaching approaches, involving
not only thousands of hours of practice, but also ongoing cycles of re-
flection and experimentation. Their teaching was not something that
could come off the shelf; they hadn't adopted the latest in "best prac-DEEPER TEACHING
30I
tices." Rather, they had forged consequential identities around the type
of teachers they wanted to be, which was connected to their personal
evolution and their understanding of their fields. As they had become
surer of their footing over the course of their careers, they had be-
come more confident in their visions of what they wanted for students,
and had developed wider repertoires of techniques to accomplish those
ends. Ultimately, they had discovered ways to create coherent teaching
identities that integrated their goals, their pedagogy, and their broader
selves.
But if it is true that the teaching identities and skills of these teachers
developed only over years, it is also true that they were working within
a system that was not supporting, and, in many cases was actively sub-
verting, their growth and development. The paucity of such teachers
discovered by our research is itself an indictment of the absence of such
systems to generate and nurture this kind of teaching practice. With
the exception of the teachers at MMSA, these teachers largely had to
figure this out through a long process of trial and error, aided by oc-
casional fortunate infusions of knowledge from friends or experts. In
many cases, not only were they not supported by their environments;
they also had to actively contravene or buffer the expectations of
administrators, district officials, or state tests.
What would it look like to create a different kind of ecosystem of
schools? One that was organized in such a way that such teaching could
be rule rather than exception? We turn to these questions next.
421