IG
)
S
)
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
I79
people who are learning it are critically important for maintaining the
school's values and practices.
Stepping back, the net result of IB High's emphasis on student-
centered teaching in the context of the IBDP is a level of shared prac-
tice and shared expectation from classroom to classroom that, while far
from perfectly consistent, creates an unusually strong platform for deep
learning. As one teacher who recently joined the faculty after having
spent many years teaching AP calculus in various other public schools
says:
It didn't take a month and a half for kids to be like, "Okay, yeah,
[the way this guy teaches math] is pretty awesome." It took two
days. For me, a lot of that is because they're used to being chal-
lenged. They're used to being asked to think, and that's really,
really nice. It's really nice to not be the one teacher doing that, or
one of five teachers doing that, or even one of ten teachers doing
that, but to actually have an entire school of teachers doing that.
It makes it so much easier to do.
An Inclusive Culture
"I said it before and I'll say it again: the IB is a chameleon," Mr. Costa
tells us for the third time. He retreats into silence. With his thick
glasses, grizzled beard, and poker-faced expression, it is hard to tell
whether he is amused or annoyed by our many queries. Still, given his
status as the most knowledgeable and seasoned IB teacher at IB High-
over the course of his forty-year career he has taught, led, and helped
to establish the IBDP in four different schools around the globe-we
persevere in our questioning. "What makes you use the word chame-
leon?" we ask. "And how, exactly, is IB so different here than at other
schools where you've worked?"
Our persistence seems to convince Mr. Costa that our desire to un-
derstand the school is genuine. Suddenly becoming more animated, he
launches into a lively description of the experience of joining the IB
High community a decade ago, shortly after the school had received
its IBO accreditation and Mr. Weber had been hired to lead the charge.
At all of the schools where he worked prior to IB High, Mr. Costa says,
9I80
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
there was enormous pressure for students to excel on the exams-
pressure that often threatened to distort the core values of the pro-
gram. "By shooting just for high scores, you may, in fact, be sabotaging
the essence of what the program is about-the combination of intel-
lectual excellence, thinking carefully, an international perspective, un-
derstanding the other, and focusing on kids and their development
instead of on stuff," he says. It became clear to him right away, he
continues, that Mr. Weber shared this humanistic view of IB. It was
this view, for example, that prompted the executive director to insist
from the start that all students participate in IB classes-and to make it
abundantly clear to everyone that meaningful participation should be
valued above raw achievement. This message, Mr. Costa tells us, has
allowed the school to avoid the overly achievement-oriented tenor that
the program often takes on in more elite contexts. "When teachers start
teaching IB, they're afraid they're gonna be judged about their teaching
abilities if the kids don't do well. We have to spend a lot of time building
morale. ... telling them that [the kids] may not all be getting sixes. It
doesn't matter. What counts is they've been through this experience,"
he says. His colleagues, even those who know far less about the range
of ways that the IBDP plays out in other contexts, clearly have processed
this message. "We don't focus on saying we're trying to get everyone
to achieve at this one level-our administrators especially are very op-
posed to any language or policies that might reflect that sort of thinking,"
one math teacher says. "Rather, we measure success largely through
participation."
As we talk with other IB High leaders, teachers, and students, it be-
comes clear that this emphasis on inclusivity is central to the school's
culture— and that it is manifested in a rich variety of ways. The most
obvious of these is the element that Mr. Costa emphasizes: the absence
of tracking paired with the valuing of participation over achievement.
Teachers, in particular, are keenly aware of how this affects the social
dynamics of their classes. One math teacher, describing a girl in his IB
math studies class who has a significant cognitive disability, says that
her case illustrates the school's philosophy:
I don't think every kid's going to get an IB diploma, but I think
that every kid's going to get an IB education. In the end, I
think that's really the most important thing... just that philos-
IN
Ct
a)
h
W
te
0:
di
es
al
C
st
al
SE
ta
01
o1
SI
le
eiARNING
= pro-
aging
intel-
e, un-
iment
ly, he
t was
insist
ake it
Id be
, has
that
start
hing
ling
is. It
Ice,"
nge
ised
one
op-
1g,"
1gh
Je-
al's
ost
ICe
nt.
ial
IB
at
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
18I
ophy of kindness and inclusion... I think because it's an IB-
for-all program, you have that. That's what lets me not worry
about [this girl] getting mocked.
Beyond the school's baseline "IB for all" strategy, the faculty is en-
couraged to let students make their own choices about which high-level
and standard-level courses to take once they reach eleventh grade. "We
have students who have chosen to take a higher-level course that maybe
we wouldn't describe as being 'higher-level material," the same math
teacher says, noting that these students may not be earning high scores
on the IAs or exams but are still benefiting from the experience of
delving more deeply into course content. He adds that the school's lead-
ership encourages teachers to celebrate students' growth over time re-
gardless of their actual achievement levels— and that some, though not
ail, of his colleagues take this idea of cultivating a "growth mindset"
very seriously. ®
IB High's students, too, comment on the impact of the school's cul-
ture of inclusion, with many of them emphasizing that because of this
culture they end up accomplishing much more than they ever expected.
One student, for example, talks about how both he and his parents were
skeptical that he could participate in the IBDP's immersion-model
foreign language classes, given that he has dyslexia; however, after en-
rolling in Spanish because the school gave him no other choice, he re-
alized that, with extensive support, he not only was able to learn a
second language but also could enjoy the process of doing so. Others
talk about how prior to matriculating to IB High they never identified
themselves as "the kind of person who would do a super-intense pro-
gram like IB,
" but how over time they began to see themselves as se-
rious and intellectually engaged learners. IB High's students also note
other ways in which the school communicates the value of inclusion,
often emphasizing the school's unusual policy that nobody gets cut from
sports teams, regardless of background or skill.lº A few also talk about
how even the student government reflects an inclusive spirit: rather than
letting the election process become a schoolwide popularity contest,
each advisory group chooses two students to represent its interests to
the campus principals, and to report back during advisory sessions.
IB High's emphasis on inclusion might in fact be likened to that of a
large and high-functioning family: the adults at the helm do not ignore182
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
the inevitable variation in their children's inclinations, abilities,
and temperaments, but they do not use this variation as an excuse for
excluding anyone from group activities deemed inherently worthwhile.
Instead, they offer encouragement, support, and nonjudgmental accep-
tance of a range of outcomes—and they cultivate opportunities for dif-
ferent children to excel in different ways. With this in mind, it comes as
no surprise that at IB High, students and teachers alike frequently de-
scribe the school as feeling like a "family" or "team."
The school's inclusive stance, however, is not in and of itself a guar-
antee of consistent deep learning for all. It is hardly a stretch, after all,
to imagine that a school with an emphasis on inclusive participation
could unintentionally devolve into a place where low expectations dom-
inate. Recall, for example, the case from Chapter 2 of Inspire Acad-
emy— a largely untracked school in which, although students reported
feeling welcomed and at least somewhat engaged in the projects their
teachers designed, cognitive rigor was often absent. How does IB High
avoid this pitfall?
High External Expectations, Support for Students
One of the answers to this question lies in the high cognitive demand
associated with the IB assessments and in the semi-external nature of
the IBO's grading system. As the IB coordinator at IB High North says,
"I think sending the assessments overseas or to other schools is very
powerful both for the teacher and for the student. ... It decreases sub-
jectivity." Another teacher, echoing this sentiment, notes that that IB
"allows us to tell students that they've succeeded because of their
efforts and their participation and their growth, but also not to give
them false praise. There's still an external benchmark... and the top
of the scale is very high." In addition, since students receive feedback
and externally moderated grades at various points during each two-
year course, both they and their teachers are more motivated to seek
improved outcomes over time than they might be if, as with the Ad-
vanced Placement program or other culminating exams, scores were
released only following final exams or graduation. Finally, although
IB High manages to avoid the kind of cutthroat achievement culture
found in some affluent suburban schools, it is hard to imagine that the
INTERI
middl
nomi
receis
phasi:
ensui
Or
a ser
and I
mear.
meet
ricuh
Engl
Mr.!
and t
we g
comI
inter
nicat
visib
Ms.
veloj
colle
stud
As c
neve
then
IF
mor
the
that
mea
and
pen
for
sup
nee
fice
atteEEPER LEARNING
ons, abilities,
an excuse for
y worthwhile.
mental accep-
inities for dif-
id, it comes as
requently de-
itself a guar-
tch, after all,
participation
tations dom-
Ispire Acad-
nts reported
rojects their
Des IB High
ve demand
I nature of
Vorth says,
ols is very
eases sub-
lat that IB
e of their
ot to give
id the top
feedback
sach two-
id to seek
1 the Ad-
ores were
although
t culture
that the
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
I83
middle- and upper-middle-class families that are part of this socioeco-
nomically diverse school would tolerate having few students actually
receive the IB diploma. Thus, the school's internally cultivated em-
phasis on inclusion is balanced by various external forces that help to
ensure a baseline of rigor and externally certified achievement.
Out of their commitment to all learners, IB High also has developed
a series of supports to help all of their students participate fully
and meaningfully in the IB curriculum. At the instructional level, this
means that departments spend a significant portion of their bi-weekly
meeting time thinking about how to differentiate and scaffold the cur-
riculum. Referring to the many years that he spent teaching in IB High's
English department before becoming the campus principal at North,
Mr. Stone says, "We know that we can't just say, 'All right, kids, go home
and think about these things.' Instead [what we think about is] how are
we going to make graphic organizers? How are we going to develop a
common language? How do we find books that are short and [of] high
interest so we can develop students' thinking and reading and commu-
nication abilities?" Mr. Lowe's class, with its emphasis on making
visible the reasoning and expectations associated with translation, and
Ms. Walsh's class, with its frequent opportunities for students to de-
velop their thinking orally before starting to write, both exemplify this
collective commitment to scaffolding the curriculum. For their part,
students pick up on their teachers' commitment to supporting them.
As one student says, "I can ask my history teacher for help and he'll
never look at me funny-it's extra work for my teachers, but if I ask
them for it, they're excited that I want to know, which I love."
IB High also has a number of structures to help students develop the
more general "student skills" needed to participate meaningfully in
the IBDP. As Mr. Costa puts it, the school treats the program as one
that specifies "college-like work with high school-like supervision." This
means that students who lack the organization, executive function,
and / or academic background to handle the rigors of the program inde-
pendently receive large amounts of personalized support. Lunch period,
for example, doubles as "make-up learning time," an administrator-
supervised study period for students who have fallen behind and/or
need extra tutoring. Most teachers also offer frequent afterschool of-
fice hours and study sessions, which a large number of students report
attending. More globally, the school's response to students who are in184
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
danger of what Mr. Stone calls "big mess-ups" is to intervene compas-
sionately, rather than to penalize them. Mr. Steedman, Mr. Stone's
counterpart at IB High South, sees this practice as not only allowing
more students to meet the program's many requirements but also
facilitating long-term learning and growth:
I don't think that people who don't hand things in on time are fail-
ures in life. Yes, you have dead lines in the IB, but you try to keep
[students] in the game as long as possible.... So, for example, the
extended essay is due October 3ist but some kids are not going to
have it done by October 3ist, and when you realize that, that's
when you really surround that kid and say, "Okay, what's really get-
ting in the way, why don't you stay in for lunch, why don't you
meet the teacher?" And you give them a pathway to access. So there
are some students here who wrote their extended essay in about a
month's time, because we sat together and helped them navigate
the library and things like that, and in the end they got a D and it
wasn't a great essay, but they had that experience— and now they're
at [the state university's flagship campus] and doing just fine. So
with IB for all, you're trying to give students experiences that they
learn from ... and hopefully they'll make all kinds of mistakes and
then when they get to college and they're faced with their first
major paper, they're like, "Oh, I made those mistakes in high
school, I'm not going to do that again."
The process of identifying students who need these "pathways to ac-
cess" is facilitated by the advisory program, the special education and
guidance departments, and regular grade-team meetings where faculty
identify and strategize about students who are struggling. The small
size of most classes-Mr. Weber insists that spending money to keep
classes at or below twenty is well worth tradeoffs such as the lack of a
cafeteria or gymnasium at each campus-also means that teachers are
able to keep close tabs on individual progress so that they can inter-
vene early when students are struggling or falling behind. IB High thus
strikes a middle ground between Dewey High, where student failures
are fully normalized as opportunities for reflection and growth, and No
Excuses High, where failures of any kind are avoided at all costs.
INT
Ar
IB
is l
ser
wh
br:
en
ali
wa
co
ou
cu
scl
co
or
co
kT
kI
IS
so
W:
SI.
ar
ta
st
as
F:
tl
CI
nEARNING
ompas-
Stone's
llowing
ut also
fail-
reep
the
§ to
at's
yet-
TOU
ere
It a
ate
lit
're
3o
st
h
ac-
ind
Ity
all
ep
Fa
re
r-
1S
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
185
An Intellectual Community
IB High's final buttress against the encroachment of low expectations
is less structural but equally powerful: its overall culture of intellectual
seriousness. Described by teachers and students alike, this culture is one
where deep engagement with academic content is a central and cele-
brated communal value. As one student says, "You have to learn to
embrace your nerdiness here. ... At [my previous school] I didn't re-
alize that I could know something but not understand it —now I really
want to understand." Echoing this sentiment, a veteran math teacher
compares IB High to the various schools where he had taught previ-
ously, emphasizing his sense that "[here] there is a natural intellectual
curiosity and it's an intellectual community. That's what so many
schools don't have— they have a community, but it's not an intellectual
community." He goes on to note that this characterization applies not
only to the students but also to the faculty, citing as an example how a
colleague in the history department recently approached him and,
knowing that he used to teach economics, revealed that she wanted to
know more about the stock market in order to be able to teach the
1929 crash more deeply. "She was... 'I don't get the stock market'
so we sat down in the faculty room and for about thirty minutes I
walked her through it." That this interaction happened in the campus
faculty room—a public space that at many schools is the domain of
small-talk and gossip-speaks to the pervasive culture of curiosity
and self-initiated learning that extends to IB High's adults.
What creates this culture? Certainly it is in part supported and sus-
tained by the deliberate selection of teachers who care deeply about the
subjects that they teach. The IB itself is a contributor, in the questions
it asks and the work it requires. As Ms. Walsh, who teaches IB history
as well as Theory of Knowledge, says: "I felt ... high school honors U.S.
History was an exercise in trivia-like, 'Okay, I'll make flashcards.
Here, you really put a microscope on it. You really look at the details.
That, I think, leads to a level of intellectualism." Beyond this, two of.
the program's three core requirements-the Theory of Knowledge
course and the extended essay-reflect a belief that adolescents can and
should engage in sustained conceptual inquiry. This belief is one that
many of IB High's faculty and staff seem to have internalized. As oneI86
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
summarizes it, "Adults treat students like they have a brain.... there's
a real respect for student ideas, and they rise to that."
School Pride Based on Learning and Equity
At once overused and undertheorized, the term "school pride" refers
to a phenomenon that popular representations of high school mainly
link to domains beyond the classroom: sports teams, glee clubs, and
other competitive extracurricular groups. At IB High, however, a feeling
of collective identity emerges directly from the school's "IB for all" mis-
sion. For students, this feeling stems from knowing that they and their
peers are contending with similar challenges. As one diploma-seeking
senior describes it, "There's this sense of community with people, even
if they're not [pursuing the] full IB [diploma], because you still have to
take these difficult classes where we're all going through the same thing.
If you've never talked to someone, your first word with them is like,
'Ah, how are you doing on your math? I'm really struggling?" Teachers
too describe a sense of shared purpose linked to the conviction that sup-
porting "regular kids" through a program designed for the intellectual
elite is incredibly difficult. To this end, many faculty members use lan-
guage that evokes the experience of perseverance in the face of adver-
sity; they talk about feeling solidarity with students in a common "quest"
to "conquer" the IB. Mr. Lowe takes this line of thinking a step further,
explaining that the school's distinctive mission makes it especially
important that students see their teachers modeling intense effort:
You have to remember that these kids are attempting a curriculum
that in most situations they would never be allowed to attempt. It's
difficult. It's really difficult. [The students] really need you on their
team.. If I'm asking them to work as hard as they are, then I
need to be working as hard as they are. Otherwise, it's unbalanced.
In asking them to do these things, I've got to make sure that I'm
doing that sort of stuff, too, that's pushing me. The kids know that.
They see that.
Thus, for Mr. Lowe, the school's emphasis on cultivating collective
identity is directly tied to his instructional practice.
INTERI
Mr
mean
are hy
engag
privil
schoo
what
origil
grout
way ti
of col
this v
runni
acces:
staff:
to cre
resou
the sc
ofits:
we hi
day il
the h
hono
IB fc
At fi
midd
dents
statel
an at
venes
ways
A cl
distri
space
lightNING
ere's
fers
nly
ind
ing
is-
eir
ng
en
to
g.
e,
r's
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
187
Mr. Lowe is not alone in seeing the school's mission as giving broader
meaning to his work. Almost without exception, the school's teachers
are hyper-aware that their school represents a frontier with respect to
engaging "ordinary" students in a program that was designed for the
privileged few. For some, namely those coming from elite international
schools, the desire to bring the IBDP to a broader array of learners is
what attracted them to the school in the first place. For others, their
original commitment lay with engaging historically marginalized
groups in deeper learning, and IB High's "IB for all" model offered a
way to do so. Regardless of their backgrounds, teachers express a sense
of collective pride about the school's work, as well as a shared belief that
this work transcends any given set of students. Many are involved in
running regional and national training sessions focused on expanding
access to the IBDP; several members of the school's special education
staff also recently collaborated with counterparts from around the globe
to create "The IB Guide to Inclusive Education," a strategic planning
resource for schools. Even those who are newer to the program and to
the school express a sense of purpose rooted in the school's enactment
of its mission. As one teacher reports, "I think that one of the best things
we have going here is that we are successful. We see the success every
day in our students' faces, in their conversations, in our classrooms, in
the hallway. That just feeds on itself. You just know that it's a great
honor to be part of this experiment."
IB for All? Access, Equity, and Scale
At first sight, the Benjamin Franklin Upper School—a non-selective
middle and high school serving roughly five hundred high-poverty stu-
dents in an immigrant-heavy section of a Northeast city-appears
stately. The campus is housed in a century-old brick building with
an arching entryway and all of the features that one imagines in a
venerable institution of secondary learning-high-ceilinged hall-
ways, leaded-glass windows, built-in bookshelves, hardwood floors.
A closer look, however, reveals a state of disrepair that speaks to the
district's tight budget as well as to a general lack of attentiveness to the
space. In the hallways, locker doors hang loose. In the classrooms,
light fixtures dangle precariously and the windows are permanently188
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
clouded with dust and age. Throughout, there is a conspicuous absence
of books and technology, and only a few rooms have any kind of stu-
dent work displayed on the walls. "We say [this school] is a prison
because there's broken stuff everywhere and there's no supplies," one
eleventh-grader reports.20
Despite this state of dilapidation, the school-known locally as "the
Franklin" — has a growing local reputation for its academic rigor. Since
receiving accreditation in 2010, it has functioned as an IBO world
school, offering the IBDP to its upperclass students and, more recently,
the IB Middle Years Programme to its younger students. Not coinci-
dentally, given IB High's location only ninety miles south and its status
as the most successful unscreened IB school in the region, Franklin's
leadership team has been in ongoing conversations with IB High's
administrators, and, accordingly, the parallels between the strategies
that the two schools employ are striking. Like at IB High, students at
Franklin can choose whether or not to pursue the full IB diploma but
all are required to take IBDP classes. Mirroring IB High, students
with special needs (I9 percent), as well as those with limited English
proficiency (I6 percent), are given extra support but still included in
IB programming. And as at IB High, virtually all teachers at Franklin
have attended at least one IBO-sponsored training-which in Frank-
lin's case has cost the school upward of $1o0,000, since few of its
teachers had prior exposure to the program. The Washington Post rec-
ognized Franklin's as one of the "most challenging high schools in
the United States," an honor that recognized the school's commit-
ment to having a school of high-poverty students exclusively enrolled
in an IB curriculum.
One only has to spend a few hours in the hallways and classrooms of
Franklin, however, to realize just how much work lies ahead if the school
is to actualize the promises of the IB as a framework for deep learning
One April afternoon, for example, a group of diploma-seeking seniors
gathers in a downstairs classroom to serve as an audience for each
other's Theory of Knowledge presentations. The structure and goals of
these presentations are common across all schools offering the IBDP: in
order to support each other in consolidating their learning prior to the
end-of-course written examination, groups of students present for
roughly twenty minutes on one disciplinary area (for example the natural
sciences or the arts), giving examples to illustrate the epistemological
INTE
stri
the
enc
ara
thi:
the
sch
the
-
has
po
pre
Af
thi
laf
hu
th
th
an
to
yc
er
in
ol
th
al
e
St
a
N
tARNING
›sence
if stu-
srison
" one
: "the
Since
Torld
ntly,
inci-
atus
lin's
gh's
gies
S at
but
nts
ish
in
lin
ik-
its
C-
t-
:d
if
:
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
I89
structures that characterize the discipline, then fielding questions from
the audience. As one might imagine, the outcomes of this task can vary
enormously depending on the students' skill levels and degree of prep-
aration, as well as on the broader culture of the class and the school. In
this case, there are roughly twenty students in the room, as well as
their Theory of Knowledge teacher and two invited panelists: the
school's co-headmaster and the IB math coordinator. As we observe,
the first presentation unfolds.
The presenters are six twelfth-grade boys-three black, two Asian, and
one Latino-who stand in a loose semi-circle facing the audience. They
have handed out a sheet labeled "The Human Sciences" with some bullet-
pointed definitions on it. There is no projection technology; instead, the
presenter on the far left holds an open laptop in front of him like a book.
After the teachers engage in some shushing, the room quiets down and
the group members introduce themselves. The presenter holding the
laptop begins: "So I know that you guys may be thinking: what are the
human sciences? Is it the science of humans? Definitely not." He reads
the definition of the human sciences verbatim, crouching slightly to see
the screen. "It's [al pretty clear difference between the natural sciences
and the human sciences," he says. "In the natural sciences it's much easier
to come up with laws and rules. Human behavior can't be studied like that,
you can't actually prove things.... like depression: through natural sci-
ences you can show that a certain chemical is activated in the brain, but
in the human sciences you might see someone walking around smiling but
the next week they committed suicide and you had no idea. It's not as
observable."
The next group-member takes the laptop from his peer and reads about
the history of the human sciences verbatim from the screen. He slouches
and mumbles as he speaks, and within a minute various side conversations
erupt. He looks enormously relieved when his section is over. The pre-
senter standing next to him says that he is going to give an example of
activity that involves the human sciences. He asks one of the other pre-
senters to smile and asks, rhetorically, "Do we know if he's really happy?
No... there's no way that we can tell for sure." He then asks the students
in the audience to make faces at each other and to guess how the person
they're looking at is feeling. The noise level in the room immediately
bubbles up; audience members leer at each other and generally goof190
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
around for a couple of minutes while the presenters remain standing at
the front of the room, occasionally flashing each other a sheepish grin.
The math coordinator appears to be jotting down some thoughts on a
sheet of paper but neither she nor the other adults have a formal rubric
that they are using to evaluate the presentations.
After a few minutes have passed, the Theory of Knowledge teacher
calls the group together and says that it's time for the presenters to field
questions from the panelists. The co-headmaster, a middle-aged Asian
man who has been observing the goings-on with arms folded, asks why
the word "science" is in the term "human science." None of the group
members answer; an awkward silence descends. Eventually, the Theory
of Knowledge teacher intervenes with another question. "How could you
operationalize happiness in a way that's not self-reported?" he asks. One
of the presenters says that he might draw different faces and ask a sub-
ject to point out the one that best represents their mood. The teacher.
shakes his head and says,
"I want you to give me an example of how you
could measure happiness in a way that isn't self-reported." A different
student says that you could measure blood pressure or heart rate. The
teacher says, "Right!" He goes on to give a number of other examples of
how to measure emotions using physiology, talking for almost the entirety
of the remaining five minutes in the presentation. A few of the audience
members nod as he speaks; others are looking out the windows or doo-
dling on the presentation handouts. The presenters shift their weight
around, appearing relieved to let the teacher take the reins. One of the
students at the back of the room mutters to a friend, "Why do we even
have to do IB? We're not, like, European."
There are certainly some glimmers of depth to be found in this as-
signment, especially when framed in terms of its aspirations. Students
were tasked with the collective responsibility to take on a conceptually
complex topic; their presentation included an illustration of one of the
core dilemmas associated with what it might mean to ascertain "truth"
in a particular discipline; there were opportunities for interactive en-
gagement by audience members; and the presence of the two panelists
attempted to raise the stakes for the assignment. All of these compo-
nents are highly aligned with the vision of deep learning specified by
the IBDP. But the reality didn't come close to meeting the ideal of the
program.
INT
i
un
mc
exe
inc
tas
pel
po
lac
thr
ob
ge.
pa
tio
ga
be
de
ab
at
te1
wt
ta!
M
nc
ac
th
es
de
to
pr
sic
tir
sh
prINTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
ISI
Most striking, perhaps, the presenters' lack of basic academic skills
undermined their ability to do what had been asked of them. Given that
most of the presenters read verbatim from a secondary source, for
example, it is unclear to what extent any of them had engaged in the
independent synthesis and cross-disciplinary comparisons that the
task was intended to support. Furthermore, the simplicity of the ex-
periment they designed and their inability to tackle the questions
posed by the panelists suggest that their understanding of the subject
lacked conceptual depth. All of these limitations were exacerbated by
their obvious-even painful-lack of comfort and fluency when it
came to presenting publicly.
These problems were by no means limited to this particular task. Our
observations, as well as our conversations with teachers and leaders, sug-
gest that they play out in a variety of ways throughout the school. In
particular, teachers at Franklin find themselves thwarted by the ques-
tion of how to ensure that students with significant skill and knowledge
gaps— a group that comprises a majority of the school's population- can
be meaningfully engaged in the high-level tasks that IBDP coursework
demands. When tackling an IA task, for example, how should one think
about trying to offer appropriate support to eleventh-graders who read
at the equivalent of a fourth-grade level, and / or who have not yet mas-
tered basic mathematical concepts? What should they do with students
who are unable and / or unwilling to work independently on academic
tasks in the sustained way that many of the IBDP assessments require?
More broadly, how might they convince students, many of whom do
not come from English-speaking or college-educated families, that the
academic intensity of the IBDP is worth the effort when compared to
the less ambitious curricula offered at neighboring high schools—
especially since only a small fraction of Franklin students who seek the
diploma are able to earn it?
The school's leaders, for their part, share these concerns. They also
describe their bafflement about how to change what they acknowledge
to be a pattern of teacher-centered, "worksheet-centered" instructional
practices, especially given that the school's budget and time for profes-
sional learning are extremely limited. One of the co-principals is par-
ticularly focused on the instructional issue, emphasizing that while the
shift to becoming an IB school has encouraged some changes in teaching
practice, especially within the math department, it has not penetrated
preslen.192
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
as widely or as deeply as he had anticipated. Students, too, pick up on
this pattern. As one insightful senior reports:
In tenth grade we didn't learn anything new, but when we got to
eleventh grade the teachers went to this IB training over the
summer and so then they started pushing the students to know
more. The biggest shift was the way teachers communicated. When
we were sophomores our teachers didn't really communicate, but
after the training they started to get to know us better and began
asking us what we thought sometimes. ... They still talk a lot but
[at least they want us to know the stuff.
These sentiments, along with our observations, suggest that one of the
key missing elements at Franklin is the unusual and important stance
that a large number of teachers at IB High seem to share—a stance that
couples a real interest in who students are and how they think with a
genuine belief in what they can do when given adequate support.
Franklin is also missing a number of the other mechanisms present
at IB High. It did not have a cadre of teachers with existing knowledge
of IB to guide newer teachers in understanding the program. It did not
have built-in response mechanisms through which teachers could care-
fully unpack their lessons and receive feedback from more knowledge-
able others. It had not developed a specific set of supports for students
who were struggling with the IB requirements. Without these mecha-
nisms, "IB for All" became more of an aspiration than a reality, which
in turn made it hard to sustain a culture of equity.
IB High also had some structural characteristics that gave it a sig-
nificant leg up over Franklin. IB High is a socioeconomically diverse
school, which means that some students come from professional-class
homes. IB High is also a charter school, which means that both stu-
dents and teachers have chosen to be there. As a nonselective, high-
poverty district school, Franklin has fewer financial resources, less
control over hiring processes, a dramatically more limited set of pro-
fessional learning programs, an inferior facility, and far less ability to
attract and retain middle-class families than does its counterpart down
the coast. That Franklin has to compete with highly selective local
magnet schools, which serve as a "brain drain" for the area's more mo-
tivated and highly skilled middle-school students, puts it at a further
INTERNATION.
disadvantags
skill gaps an
students intr
folding opp
as we exploi
kind of syst
In this cr
field's "lear
and equitak
demonstrat
learners tha
level charac
potential o:
tion of hou
disadvanta
school doe
all; rather,
IB successf
A System
Can Interi
• The resea
important
and of itse
would me:
across the
these outc
through it
of these a:
the impor
But infras
tool, it wi
supports
mechanis:
vious ext
willingneVING
I on
Je
ce
at
a
e
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
193
disadvantage. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the severity of the
skill gaps and language barriers that characterize a large number of its
students intensifies the question of how to embed remediation and scaf-
folding opportunities into ambitious academic tasks—a question that,
as we explore in Chapters 7 and 8, the field has yet to answer with any
kind of systemic coherence.
In this context, IB High can be seen as a living illustration of the
field's "learning edge" in terms of using the IBDP as a tool to create
and equitably distribute opportunities for deep learning. The school
demonstrates the viability of bringing the IBDP to a broader range of
learners than historically have had access to it, and it reveals the school-
level characteristics that can help leaders and teachers to actualize the
potential of the program. What it does not as yet answer is the ques-
tion of how to overcome the tangle of problems that plague the most
disadvantaged pockets of the K-i2 system. To put it differently, the
school does not reveal what it might take to offer IB successfully for
all; rather, it tells a compelling story about what it might take to offer
IB successfully for more.
A System for Deep Learning?
Can International Baccalaureate create a system for deeper learning?
The research in this chapter suggests that it should be viewed as an
important resource in meeting that aspiration, but is not a cure-all in
and of itself. As an "anchor" it offers a rich, detailed vision of what it
would mean for students to think complexly in different subjects and
across them. As a scaffold it can help to guide teacher learning toward
these outcomes. It also serves as a safeguard against low expectations
through its creation of a series of externally moderated assessments. All
of these assets that the program brings reinforce the arguments about
the importance of building an infrastructure to support deep learning.
But infrastructure is not self-enacting. Like any other external policy
tool, it will achieve its aspirations only if paired with internal school
supports and mechanisms that help teachers realize its vision. These
mechanisms include frequent feedback from lead teachers who have pre-
vious experience with IB, a cultural commitment to equity, and a
willingness to provide additional support to students who need helpI94
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
meeting the IB requirements. IB High is also distinctive in the equi-
table and humanistic stance it takes toward students: it does not track,
and it foregrounds participation in IB over results on the exams to
avoid the danger of IB becoming yet another form of test prep.2l The
IB creates the opportunity to work toward deeper learning, but it is
still the adults in the building who create the culture, tone, and stance
toward students that make the school what it is.
From the perspective of scale, there are pessimistic and optimistic
ways to read this conclusion. The pessimistic view is that if the
knowledge and skill of the teachers and the culture of the school are
what shape the outcomes, and IB can achieve its promise only once
those school-level factors are in place, then it is still really the people
in the school who count. The optimistic view would acknowledge the
importance of local talent and skill, but assert that IB plays three crit-
ical functions. First, by setting clear and highly specific set of expecta-
tions for students, it lessens the load on the school, creating a clear sense
of the "what" and freeing the school to work on the "how." Second, by
creating a system that is externally moderated and has high standards,
it creates pressure to create and maintain rigorous learning and helps
schools see where they stand in helping their students accomplish com-
plex disciplinary tasks. And third, by creating a shared framework of
what is to be learned, it serves as a platform for teacher learning around
common content and objectives—-learning that accumulates over the
years as teachers gain practice teaching, receiving and later giving feed-
back, and eventually serving as IB examiners. Thus while it is fair to
say that no externally derived system can be successfully utilized without
a corresponding level of knowledge, skill, culture, and internal coher-
ence in the school in which it is employed, IB can play an important
role in helping schools to build those critical qualities.
IB is also intriguing because it strikes a middle ground between more
radical and more traditional visions of deep learning. To this end, the
IBDP came up in our conversations with leaders at both Dewey High
and No Excuses High-and, as it turns out, both schools view the pro-
gram in a positive light. At Dewey High, outward-facing network
leaders have connected as critical friends with leaders at several IB high
schools abroad; their view is that the diploma program, while more
conventional than Dewey High in how it organizes the "what" of aca-
demic learning, provides a platform for richly constructivist and glob-
t.
7
a
g& LEARNING
the equi-
not track,
exams to
ep.21 The
, but it is
ad stance
timistic
it if the
hool are
ily once
= people
dge the
ree crit-
xpecta-
ar sense
and, by
ndards,
d helps
h com-
rork of
tround
er the
§ feed-
fair to
ithout
oher-
ortant
more
I, the
High
pro-
work
high
nore
aca-
lob-
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
195
ally oriented classrooms that have much in common with their own.
At No Excuses High, leaders view the program with admiration; they
even have considered adopting the IBDP as a more rigorous and inte-
grated alternative to their current curricular programs, deciding against
this option only because it would require abandoning the extensive in-
frastructure that they have built around the SAT lis and the APs.
That two such dramatically different schools take the IBDP seriously
as an approach to creating deep learning says a great deal about the pro-
gram's potential as a mechanism by which to deepen what happens in
many American high school classrooms.