cutena
Deeper Teaching:
Rigor, Joy, and Apprenticeship
We HAvE SEEN How extracurricular and elective activities can pro-
vide platforms for powerful learning experiences. How can similar
qualities be created in core academic classes? While we struggled to find
whole schools where consistent excellence in core classes was the norm,
we did find individual teachers who had achieved it in their classrooms.
They worked in all kinds of schools (traditional public, charter, and
private); they handled a variety of subjects; and they taught students in
lower tracks as well as higher ones. What were these teachers doing dif-
ferently? How did their backgrounds and life experiences differ from
those of their colleagues? How did they achieve deeper learning with
students who were struggling to build basic skills? And how can the
work of these teachers inform a broader effort toward deeper learning?
We identified these teachers by focusing on three primary criteria:
cognitive challenge, engagement, and participation. With respect to
cognitive challenge, we sought out classrooms where the task that stu
dents were confronted with was in the top half of Bloom's taxonomy-
with students asked to analyze, synthesize, or create— or were in levels
three or four of Webb's depth of knowledge scale, which similarly fo-
cuses on complex thinking as opposed to recall or application! With
respect to engagement, we were interested in the ethos of the classroom:
was it a place where there was energy in the room, where students spoke,
with both knowledge and enthusiasm about the work they were doing?
Did their body language and vocal or written contributions suggest that
they were "in task" as well as "on task," rather than counting the
308DEEPER TEACHING
309
minutes until the bell rang? Our third criterion was participation. We
picked classes where at least three-quarters of the students were actively
engaged with the task; running a great class for a few students isn't ,
enough. In addition to these observational criteria, we triangulated with
other information: these were also classes that were highly recom-
mended by faculty and students, classes that people in the schools we .
visited said we had to see if we wanted to see the "deepest" teaching at
their school. They were the classes where discussions spilled out into
the hallway and cafeteria. Predictably, they were also the classes that
older students reported remembering years later.
To write about these teachers, we drew on class observations, lengthy
interviews, artifacts including planning documents and students' work,
and conversations with students. We used Mill's methods of agreement
to identify what was in common among these "deeper teachers" and
Mill's methods of difference to verify that these characteristics were dif-
ferent from those of the many other teachers in our study? Our coding
process began inductively, although having attended the classes, we
could see some clear differences in the choices that teachers were
making. Those observations informed our subsequent analytic journey.
As we read through our data, we began to see strong links between how
they saw their purpose (the why), the nature of their classrooms (the
what), and their own identities as teachers and as people (the who). Thus,
we organized our second round of coding around these three dimen-
sions of the teachers and their practice.
In an era when test scores reign supreme, some readers might find
this way of choosing teachers to be anachronistic. We understand this
critique but think it is misguided. First, the majority of state tests used
during the time of our study have been shown to measure mostly low-
level cognitive processes; hence we could not use them as indicators of
"deeper" learning? Second, studies that have tried to identify teachers
using value-added methodology have found, not surprisingly, that many
of the teachers who are "most effective" using these methods are those
who teach directly to the state tests. Third, some subjects we were
interested in lack standardized testing. Fourth, given our view that sig-
nificant learning accumulates over the long run, we were particularly
interested in teachers who inspired their charges, who were successful in
planting seeds that might grow into longstanding interest in a subject.
Focusing on teachers who inspired this passion in the moment or who3I0
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
were identified by older students as particularly good teachers seemed
like good proxies for identifying teachers with lasting influence. And
ffth, these were teachers who students and colleagues alike testified
were exceptional, which afforded us a rare opportunity to learn from
the practice of such skilled teachers.
To other readers, looking across disciplines will obscure important
differences in deeper disciplinary teaching. From one perspective, we
think this is a fair point; it would certainly be possible to delve "deeper"
into pedagogical and content techniques within particular disciplinary
arenas, and we build on discipline-specific work at certain points in the
chapter But, at the same time, we found striking similarities among
these teachers, even across disciplines, in how they thought about their
fields, how they related to their students, how they saw the purpose of
their work, and how all of this was shaped by who they were. By telling
their stories, we hope to reignite an integrative conversation about
teaching that builds on the best of the discipline-specific work but re-
engages the shared question of what makes for powerful teaching
We draw on the work of seven teachers in this chapter (all names are
pseudonyms):
• Jeff Fields, an English and philosophy teacher at Attainment
High;
• Nick Collins and Nathaniel Clarke, math teachers at a high-
poverty traditional public school in the Northeast;
• Kyle Hogan, an English teacher at a high-poverty traditional
public school in the Northeast;
• Joel Wolf and William Duchin, science teachers at Midwestern
Math and Science Academy;
• Megan Marino, a chemistry teacher at a high-poverty tradi-
tional public school in the Northeast.
All but one of these individuals have been teaching at least ten years;
their ages range from early thirties to near seventy, with the median
age early forties. Although they teach in a range of contexts, it is worth
noting that all of them teach in traditional public schools, and that four
of the seven teach in unselective schools in high-poverty urban districts.
All of these teachers identified as white; this fact reflects the disheart-
ening reality that very few of the teachers we observed in our researchDEEPER TEACHING
3II
were people of color -which is itself a reflection of the fact that more
than 80 percent of the U.S. teaching workforce remains white. There
were also five other teachers we found who had similar practices and
perspectives; in the interest of space we do not present their stories, but
our analysis of them is consistent with the argument we advance here,
as is much of our analysis of electives teachers in Chapter 6.5
The story that we tell about these teachers is a holistic one, in every
sense. We are interested not only in their practices, but also in their
identities, their journeys, and their accounts of what they are trying to
do with their students. In so doing, we seek to broaden the conversa-
tion around teaching, moving away from questions such as "What are
best practices for increasing value-added test scores?" and toward ques-
tions such as "What dispositions, skills, orientations, and identities do
we want to cultivate in teachers if the goal is to inspire and motivate
the next generation of students?" Because we see a tight link between
who these people are and how they teach, our story perhaps will be
frustrating to those who seek best practices or simple technical solu-
tions. Yet we hope that our rich account of some of the most compel-
ling educators we encountered will help future teachers as they embark
on their own journeys toward deeper teaching, as well as illustrate
what policies and practices are needed to support the development of
such consequential work.
We also hope that this approach will contribute to the scholarly lit-
erature on the subject. There is writing about good teaching, there is
writing about teachers' identities and beliefs, there is writing about the
life cycle of teaching, but there is very little writing that links teachers'
own learning experiences, identities, and stance toward their subjects
and their students to observations of how they actually teach. Since
we believe that it takes significant time to become a "deeper teacher,"
it is critical to understand the nature of these trajectories and the
evolving relationship between teachers' identities and their practices.
To the degree that previous scholars have made these links, they have
focused on teacher preparation and the first several years of teaching;
this research allows us to examine exemplary experienced teachers and
how their trajectories unfolded over longer spans of time?
There are some limits to our approach. We are deeply exploring only
seven teachers, so the generalizability of our findings awaits future re-
search. The ways that they teach in their disciplines are not the only312
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
ways to do so; there are many ways to skin each disciplinary cat. Their
accounts of their journeys are offered retrospectively, and thus are sub-
ject to the usual presentist biases that can be present in such recon-
structions. Despite these limitations, it is rare to have a chance to explore
the practice, journey, and identities of such compelling teachers; we
hope that doing so will stimulate more research of this type.
Jeff Fields: Existential Explorations
The classroom has a wall of windows that looks out on wooded lands, a
picturesque backdrop for a philosophical discussion. Mr. Fields is an
athletic-looking guy in his early forties with a laid-back energy and a deep
voice. He has a buzz cut and wears a linen shirt with rolled-up shirtsleeves
and khakis; when class begins, Mr. Fields sits at a desk facing the horseshoe
of other desks and puts on a pair of glasses. About twenty students are
sitting in the horseshoe, expectantly facing forward. They are dressed ca-
sually. This is a philosophical literature honors class at Attainment High.
The students come in and two boys talk with me briefly. When I say what
I'm here for, one of them says, "You can't get deeper than this." | ask
what that means and he says, "It's a philosophy class so we just talk about
everything.." His peer interrupts, "Everyone comes in pretending they
understand the reading-but I really only ever understand one part of it,
but what ends up happening is that we all understand different parts, so
then by the end of class we all understand all of it."
Class begins. The topic of today's class is Descartes's famous postulate:
"I think, therefore I am." Written on the board are four questions: "1. Basis
of D's argument that all he can know is that he exists? 2. What is he? 3.
From there, how prove God, and thus reality, exists? 4. Responses?" There
are no SWBATs, no agenda, just the questions." The room is humming with
energy, as students begin talking with one another in small groups about
these four questions. Mr. Fields prompts them to rejoin the large group:
"Thoughts on the first question? Ideas from the text?"
One student begins: "If he is thinking a thing, then he must exist."
Mr. Fields interjects: "Do you have language that supports?" The student
looks through the text. "Perhaps it should also come to pass that if I were
to cease thinking, then I would cease to exist," he reads from Descartes's
Meditation Two. Another student, Anna, jumps in: "If he didn't exist, heDEEPER TEACHING
3I3
wouldn't be able to think." Mr. Fields offers, "What I'm hearing you saying
is a little different than what he writes. What I heard him say in the text is
that if I'm not thinking, I don't exist." A third student asks, "Do you ever
stop thinking?" A fourth responds, "How would we know?"
They continue to deconstruct the text in this manner for about fifteen
minutes. Students are doing most of the talking, and they are sometimes
challenging each other, asking for textual support for their arguments.
Students draw on heavily marked-up texts. Eyes are attentively tracking
the speaker. Then Mr. Fields shifts the discussion from "what" to "why."
"Why is Descartes bothering with this? What's the point?"
A student answers: "The only thing I can count on is that I exist. Even
if these perceptions are wrong, I exist." (Here they are taking up Des-
cartes's idea of "the deceiver"-what if there were someone, Matrix-
style, who was trying to convince you of a reality that wasn't actually real.)
Another student adds, "There has to be something which is being de-
ceived. Since everything he is sensing doesn't have to be real, but the
thing that is thinking has to exist." "But," adds another, "the question !
have about [another student's] argument is what does it mean to exist?
God sets out your plan before you-you still exist as a person but you don't
have free will. Does the argument fall apart if something is making your
decisions? Is that a different level of existence?"
Toward the end of the period, Mr. Fields invites them to shift from un-
packing Descartes's thesis to evaluating his argument. "What about
computers?" says one student. "They seem to think, but they don't exist,"
he argues. "Or what if you are in a vegetable state," says another, "then
you can't think, but you still exist." Other students take up these hypo-
theticals, offering their views on what is necessary and sufficient to dem-
onstrate existence.
The clock reaches 8:50, the end of the period. Time has flown by.
Mr. Fields attempts to wrap up the discussion: "Tomorrow, we are going
to see how Descartes shows that if we exist, God must exist." A chorus
of cries break out across the room-how does the fact that we exist
show that God exists? Skepticism, once let out of the bottle, can't easily
be contained. As the students pack up, they continue the discussion; as
one tells us later, "After every class pretty much, we like argue about it or
discuss it for fifteen minutes after class. We walk down the halls talking
about whatever we had just talked about. People probably think we're
nuts, arguing about the nature of existence in the hallways."5 mad
14,
5
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
What makes this class tick? If you listen to the students, it begins
with Mr. Fields's enthusiasm for the subject and the intensity of his re-
spect for students' ideas about it: "In other classes, teachers are a little
bit condescending," said one. "Mr. Fields genuinely wants to know what
we have to say. He feels very genuine when he speaks to us." To sup-
port this claim, the students pointed to the fact that when they were
citing a passage, "Mr. Fields will flip to it with us," and when they said
something interesting, he would pause, and take some time to think
about what they were saying. Added another, "You can tell that he is so
passionate about the material, he really wants to know what everyone
thinks about it. ... All the really good teachers I've had really know
their material well and are really invested-not even just in teaching,
but in the material.... It's contagious."
Students took particular note that Mr. Fields recently had been or-
dained as a Zen priest, which meant that in the readings on Buddhism,
he was as interested in them as they were. "When we learned that he
had become a Zen priest," one student said, "we saw him as a person,
and in some ways, as another student. He was learning the material as
well with us, although he knew it already." Author Parker Palmer
argues that the best classes are dominated not by student or teacher
but by subject, which he calls "The Great Thing" that orients the in-
quiry. This class had that feeling: while Mr. Fields was clearly the more
knowledgeable reader, the tone of the class was one in which students
and teacher were co-exploring philosophical texts.
Part of what enabled this exploration was the way in which the stu-
dents had come to understand the discipline in which they were par-
ticipating. Rather than seeing philosophy as a fixed body of eternal
truths established by great minds throughout history, they saw it more
as a field in which they could and should seek to divine truth for them-
selves, with texts serving as contributors to their journey. "I think the
reason that people think philosophy is interesting is because there is
no right answer, the way there is in biology and math," one student said.
(This was not necessarily true in the most powerful science and math
classes, as we will explore later.) In turn, this made students' critical
task not to remember but rather to interpret the texts. In the stu-
dents' telling, this created an unusual and exciting atmosphere in the
class-one that was less focused on whether they were right or wrong
and more on whether, as a class, they had worked together to deepenDEEPER TEACHING
pAssion
3-5
Caresser
their understanding. They also noted that they had become more con-
fident in their abilities to offer these interpretations over time, and that
this growing confidence was one of the most important things they had
gained from the class.
Much as in the theater production, the ethos of Mr. Fields's class was
one that blended passion and precision, and that was grounded in a clear
sense of purpose. Class often began with simply, "Who wants to
start?"-an invitation for students to lead off with their thoughts on
the previous night's text. There were some rules for conversation,
particularly that students build on one another's points and stay close
to the text. Sometimes the atmosphere was fun and light such as
when a student exclaimed "Star Wars is such a Buddhist series of films!"
to roaring laughter from his classmates— and other times it was deadly
serious, as when students were pondering a deep philosophical conun-
drum. Not once did we hear anyone ask whether something was on the
test or whether one could get points for this or that; such questions would
have been highly discordant with the norms of the class. While there was
a lot of energy created by the existential questions at hand, there also
was considerable precision in how students talked-making a claim,
referring back to the text, and being challenged by Mr. Fields and one
another on whether one could really make that claim based on that
piece of text. In so doing, they were being inducted into some of the
key norms of philosophy as a field, in which learning how to defend
and support one's claims is critical.
Supporting this learning was a highly evolved, if almost invisible,
pedagogical approach. Mr. Fields had been teaching for twenty years;
he had learned through long practice how to set up a supportive and
collaborative classroom culture that, once established, could almost run
itself. Much as in Socratic seminars at universities or Harkness tables
at Exeter, there was not much variance in the day-to-day approach; the
task was to talk about great texts, sometimes briefly scaffolded with
some pre-writing or small-group discussion, but mainly students were
asked to read and share their understandings.' Mr. Fields had, through
much trial and error, come to four questions that guided the explora-
tion of each text: (1) What? (What did the author say?); (2) Why? (Why
was the author making that argument?); (3) Connect? (How does this
connect to other passages in the text or to other texts?); and (4) Signifi-
cance? (Why does it matter and what do we think of it?). These questions3I6
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
moved the discussion gradually outward in concentric circles, with stu-
dents first deciphering the text, then connecting the text to other
works, and only at that point, once they were sure they understood it,
evaluating what they were reading. These questions also touched on a
number of the qualities associated with deeper learning: the first two
focused on mastery, asking students to accurately unearth what a
particular author was saying and why he was saying it; the third asked
for transfer, pushing students to connect what they were learning in a
particular text with other readings; and the fourth invoked values and
identity, asking students their views of the significance of what they
were reading. All of the questions were open-ended and asked for
analysis as well as recall.
Like other teachers in this chapter, Mr. Fields often privileged depth
over breadth. Sometimes, particularly with dense philosophy, the read-
ings were only a few pages a night. He often had students read particular
passages out loud, a practice that focused the discussion and centralized
the text for shared interrogation. He had found that focusing on one
passage could solve a number of related pedagogical dilemmas: it could
equalize access to understanding, engender widespread engagement,
and build deeper understanding of the text. As he described it:
First somebody reads the passage and they hear it, but to them it
feels just like dead language. It doesn't pique their interest or cu-
riosity in any way. Then you ask the question, "So what's actually
being said in this?" Half of them are disengaged because they don't
actually understand what's even being said in the passage. Some-
body in the class will say, "Well, here's how I'm reading this." Then
another student says, "Oh, that's not how I thought of it."
Then they start to discuss it. By doing that, the people who didn't
understand the passage gain access to it. There you've got interest
because more have access to the actual passage. And by layering
one interpretation over another, students gradually deepen their
understanding of the text.
Mr. Fields also had a different approach to relevance than many other
teachers. Earlier in his career, he said, he had been more tempted to
start with a personal connection. But, he said, he had found that "as
soon as you switch to talking about the text from the personal, it's likeING
tu-
ler
1 a
d
DEEPER TEACHING
317
all the air gets let out of the balloon. They've been really excited to talk
about themselves and their personal connections to a topic. They think
it has nothing to do with the book. Then you bring the book in and
they go, 'Oh shit. He tricked us. This is actually about the book?" As
he became more experienced, he reversed the equation, beginning with
the text, asking less about the personal connection and more about "why
does this matter to us as people." The ideal, Mr. Fields said, is that there
is a recursive loop between what was learned in the text and something
one cares about in life: "Because the text is primary. "What's this text
saying?' Rather than them being primary. It's more like their interest
is all personal but it fuels their interest in the text itself. What does the
text have to teach me about how I see my family? Does this change
the way that I look at reality, or meaning in my life, or things like that?
Then they make the connection, whoa, this is true in my life, too. That's
where there's often a kind of light bulb like wow, this actually means
something. And then that realization becomes the energy that feeds the
inquiry back into [the] text."
A critical part of Mr. Fields's growth as a teacher was learning how
both to share his passion for the subject and to acknowledge that stu-
dents might find different things in the text than he would. Mr. Fields
had majored in literature, was married to a philosophy professor, and
continued to study philosophy as part of his Buddhist training. After
one unfulfilling year after college as a consultant, he felt that he had
found his life's calling in teaching literature and philosophy to high
school students, which he now had been doing for close to twenty years.
So it was not hard for him to express his passion for the subject: "If you
personify your subject as dead and kind of boring," he chuckled, "kids
are not gonna invest. If you personify it as meaningful and really impor-
tant somehow, and transformative, 'This changed my life, kids feel
that. They feel it and they wanna know how. How did it change your
life? Why is it so important to you?" In addition, he said, a critical
turning point was when he stopped trying to lead students through
the text using a series of questions that he had preselected. Students
can read that attitude in a teacher, he says, because when you pose
questions that you know the answers to, then "it's not really an open
discussion; it's more like an oral quiz."
In more recent years, Mr. Fields had shifted his approach to letting
students pick the passages to discuss: "Actually learning to withdraw318
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
from the conversation I think is really essential. Learning to ask the
question with passion because you do care about it, but to say, 'The
reason it matters to me doesn't have to be the same reason that it
matters to you. This is really important material. It has changed my
life. It's transformed the way that I see relationships. It's transformed
the way that I think of love? Then you say, 'What's it do for you?'"
He found that decentering his role had both increased students'
engagement- they were talking about the passages that mattered to
them-and signaled his respect for his charges as people whose
interests were as important as his own.
This shift, while now foundational to his approach, had not come
easily because it meant reconceiving his role as a teacher: "When I first
started doing this, it felt revolutionary because I decided to go into
the room and abandon what I knew about the text. I was no longer the
authority on the text. I'm the teacher. Your identity as a teacher is
wrapped up in being the one who knows. I think that there's something
terrifying about that because, for a teacher, you're walking in, saying
to students, 'Well, I have my own thoughts about it but they're not
actually what matter, or, 'I don't claim to know the bottom line about
this book. I can tell you my own personal feelings about it but I don't
have the answer? I think that's really scary for a lot of teachers 'cause
basically what you're doing then is you're walking into a big question
mark. In fact, you are the question mark."
But if making this change was initially scary for Mr. Fields, it did have
the empowering effect that he sought in his students. They described
it as refreshing not to be rehashing the "not like the nine thousandth
billionth, trillionth essay on The Great Gatsby about the motif of death."
And they respected that Mr. Fields didn't always have the answers: "His
attitude is not like, Tknow everything. He's really open to the fact that
he probably doesn't know everything and no one really does." Other
teachers might get "defensive" when they didn't know the answer, but
students thought that it actually "builds respect for the teacher when
they are willing to admit that they don't know everything."
A further benefit of this approach was that it gave everyone the re-
sponsibility for "deepening" the learning. The goal of the class was to
wring everything there was out of a given piece of text, and this was
something that the group could do better than any individual, including
the teacher. Mr. Fields saw this as part of his own growth as a person—
realizing that his perspective was as colored by his background and
]
1
i
S
t.
i:
C
1]
a
n
CDEEPER TEACHING
319
experiences as anyone else's-- and thus that trusting the wisdom of the
crowd would lead to richer understandings of the text than what he
alone could provide. Students saw it as about equality; that this wasn't
a class where one person knew all the answers but rather where a di-
versity of opinions was critical for deeper understanding.
At a school where there was a lot of niggling for grades, this class
stood out as one in which there was unadulterated joy in pursuit of
existential questions. As one student summed up: "I think what I love
about this is that we have thought about these questions our entire lives.
We just didn't know how to put a name to these questions. I feel like
I'm getting a glimpse of what people thought, not how individual people
think, but how humans think. I think that's really cool."
Nick Collins and Nathaniel Martin: Math as an Activity
It's one thing to develop an appreciation for open-ended inquiry in phi-
losophy, but what about mathematics? In our travels, most of the math
instruction we saw was consistent with researchers' descriptions of
American mathematics teaching: teacher-led lessons in which an in-
structor explained a rule or algorithm, went over it on the board, and
then had students apply it to "practice problems" that varied only slightly
in their particulars. lO The reactions to this approach from students, de-
pending on their interest and skill in math, ranged from workmanlike
compliance to outright boredom and disengagement. We did see a small
number of classes, however, where students were engaged in mathemat-
ical reasoning, and, relatedly, were much more engaged and interested
in their work. Most of these were in elite or advantaged settings—at
an elite private school known for its distinctive pedagogy, at a statewide
math and science magnet school, and in a few of the revamped math
classes at Attainment High. But we were particularly interested in
whether a similar approach could be implemented with more disadvan-
taged students, which brought us to Bryant High School.
Bryant is a school that serves exclusively high-poverty students, all
of whom are students of color, in a major Northeastern city. The class-
room we describe here was run by Nick Collins, a "master teacher" who
was recruited by the city's teacher residency program both to teach in
this school and to mentor a new teacher, Nathaniel Martin, who was in
his first year of teaching mathematics.
d
te
C.-320
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
I arrive at Bryant at about 8:15. The building is an old public school
building-very tall ceilings give off the feel of a large comprehensive high
school constructed in another era. It is early June, but fortunately not too
hot. The lights are off in the main hallway, presumably to save money. We
enter the room of Mr. Collins and his student teacher, Mr. Martin. Only
Mr. Martin is present. The room has a worn linoleum floor, which has X and
Y axes taped onto it with masking tape. Students are sitting at tables of
two to four, facing front. All are students of color. They are wearing dark
blue shirts with the name of the school on them. A sign on the wall reads,
"Math is an activity: questioning, noticing, calculating, exploring, organ-
izing, persevering, making sense, understanding, applying connections."
The younger teacher begins the lesson by projecting a picture of the
front of a package of balloons on the overhead. He asks the students to
call out and write down, "What do you notice?" "What can you count or
measure?" "What do you wonder?" [This is an adaptation of a well-
known protocol used in constructivist teaching: "see, think, wonder."]
The students respond, "The Balloon is red." "There is a six on the package."
As they talk, he is blowing up a balloon. "Don't pass out, man," a student
calls, and there is shared laughter; the tone of the class is light. A student
points out, "The picture of the balloon on the package is round, but the
one you are blowing up is not quite round." The teacher encourages them
to think about why and a short discussion ensues. "What other questions
could you ask?" he asks. And, "What does this balloon stuff have to do with
math class?" A student asks, "How can you measure a balloon?" and the
teacher asks this back to the class-"How can you measure the balloon?"
The students call out that there is the diameter, the radius, and the cir-
cumference. The teacher asks them to define these terms, and they
establish that you could measure the circumference but would have to
compute the radius or the diameter. Then, the teacher asks, "How many
breaths will it take to fill this balloon?" "Is it fully inflated? How would we
know?" The students ponder this, intrigued but unsure. And, he says, with
a dramatic pause, how many breaths would it take to fill a bigger balloon?
At this point the other teacher, Mr. Collins, walks in the door with a HUGE
purple balloon, almost as big as he is. "How many breaths would it take to
fill this balloon?" he asks.
The teachers hand out balloons of varying sizes. The students set to
work in small groups. Each group has a white board next to its table
where students can capture their work. The process is to blow a breath,
D
t'
9
tr
fi
a!
th
th
m
m
cl
if
W.
le
di
th
rit
sli
el
m
"[
Th
sa
to
ve
be
bu
it':
to
th.NING
hool
high
too
We
Inly
and
i of
ark
ds,
IN-
to
"
t
DEEPER TEACHING
32I
watch the balloon inflate, measure the circumference, and chart it on a
two-column chart. The goal is to figure out what kind of function re-
lates the numbers of breaths (the Xs) and the circumference (the Ys).
All of the groups are working assiduously; only one student asks to
go to the bathroom. I ask one group how they are going to solve the
problem. "We have to start with the input," says one. "The only way really
to figure it out is to try it," says another. Over time, students begin to
fill out their tables. The teachers are circulating, offering help and
asking for questions. The period ends before students can graph their
results or turn them into a function. We talk some with the students;
they say that this is a very different approach to math than anything
they have previously experienced: "more fun" and "more thinking like a
mathematician."
A new group of students files in. This class is an elective, "discrete
mathematics." Because this is a STEM-themed school (though not a
magnet or otherwise selective school), the students take additional math
classes; this class, the teachers explain, was an elective for the teachers,
if not for the students (who had to take it to fill their slate of math classes).
The teachers chose it because they liked the subject and because they
wanted the students to see something very different from what they were
learning in algebra. (Discrete math is about understanding arithmetic in
different bases, modular arithmetic, and graph theory.) The main task for
this class is a math game. The game features "trees" comprised of a se-
ries of connected lines and dots. Each player makes a move by putting a
slash line through one of the lines, and then everything above that line is
eliminated from the game. The players take turns, and whoever has to
make the last cut loses. At each configuration, the teachers prod them:
"Do you want to go first, do you want to go second, or does it matter?"
The students try out different possibilities, often playing through the
same tree more than once, to see whether various opening moves lead
to different results. There is fairly rapt attention-everyone is playing a
version of this game, and the students want to win. Energy is high at the
beginning and gradually flags as the period moves toward its conclusion,
but this is the kind of draining of energy that comes from thinking hard-
it's what you might see at a chess club. The teachers are circulating, trying
to get students to think more generally. "Why," they ask, "do in some of
these cases you want to go first and others not? What's the more general
rule here?"releva
ceR.
322
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
These two classes differ considerably from most math classes we saw
in our research. They were both organized around a single essential
question— in the first case, what sort of function will explain how many
breaths it takes to blow up a balloon; in the second, what rule will ex-
plain the winning strategy in a particular mathematical game. Both
approaches treated students as meaning-makers-while there were
some processes to be followed, students were being asked to develop
their own theories and ideas about what could explain the outcome.
The questions were also intrinsically interesting— in the first, engage-
ment was motivated by a demonstration, and in the second, the task
took the form of a game, which was itself fun, challenging, and pur-
poseful. In all of these respects these math classes differed from most
others we saw, where the common approach was for the teacher to pro-
vide an algorithm and for the students to apply the rule to a series of
practice problems. The atmosphere was also different from that in most
math classes we observed: the students were at ease with the teachers,
with a relaxed, light tone in the balloon class and a highly focused
spirit in the math games class.
How did these teachers learn to teach this way? For Mr. Collins, it
was a gradual process. He grew up in an affluent district nearby where
he had been a math whiz. From early on, he had been good at math
and he initially embraced the competitive timed tests, the "can I do my
multiplication tables faster than you" approach to math. As he got older,
he became more interested in the way in which math posed puzzles-and
the challenge to figure out these puzzles was what kept him interested
in the field. Interestingly, he was less taken by the applications of
math-for example, physics or economics— because while these made
the math more "real world," from his perspective they often made the
math itself less interesting. He found himself more drawn to fields like
computer science, where there was a big task to do, and lots of freedom
and flexibility to figure out how to do it.
Over the years, Mr. Collins had gradually figured out how to trans-
late this commitment to "puzzling through" into a set of workable ped-
agogical principles for high school students. Part of his approach came
through his university teacher-prep program, which had taken a strong
stance about the constructed nature of mathematical knowledge. Part
came from his own reading— a book that argued that "math was an ac-
tivity" rather than a "body of knowledge" was particularly influential.DEEPER TEACHING
323
And then he described the most important influence (what he called
"the biggest revolution" in his teaching) his finding of "math Twitter,"
an online community with influential figures like Berkeley professor
Jo Boaler and practicing math teacher Dan Meyer. This group had a
similar stance toward math, and across Twitter they shared ideas,
teaching strategies, and, most of all, sample problems that were "low
floor, high ceiling" — meaning that they were simple enough to offer an
easy on-ramp for all learners, but had enough room to play to be chal-
lenging for the most mathematically inclined. In our conversation,
Mr. Collins identified particular posts from Dan Meyer and others as
significantly shaping his practice, particularly the idea that "real world
did not necessarily mean real math," which was consistent with his
overall mathematical philosophy and interests.
For Mr. Martin, it had been a godsend to find Mr. Collins as his
mentor. Mr. Martin had been homeschooled for the first eight years of
his life, and thus had become used to working independently and finding
answers to his own questions. He later attended what he described as a
typical high school and, afterward, spent the first two years of college
doing work that was "fairly traditional-sit there and take notes as the
teacher talks." He continued, "I didn't start getting into actual math—
proofs and algebraic thinking — until junior and senior years," and what
he describes in retrospect as a "very procedural education." But once:
he recovered from that initial setback, he found this latter part of col-
lege very stimulating, and the kind of math he did then helped him to
think about what he was trying to do with his students. "I often think:
what would an actual mathematician do?" To answer that, "I think I'm
drawing on having studied math in college—not just when I was taking
the derivative but when I was doing proofs. ... I was inducted into the
community of mathematicians by my college professors, and I can share
that with my students." Just as the director of the theater production
had been apprenticed into theater and then, in turn, apprenticed his stu-
dents, Mr. Martin saw himself as bringing his experiences in college
mathematics to his high school students.
The result of his training was that Mr. Martin, like Mr. Collins, had
come to see math less as a field of right answers than it is usually per-
ceived to be. "Does math have right answers?" we asked. "Well," the
twenty-three-year-old responded, "as a community of humans, we've
decided that numbers are a good way to think about things," and, given324
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
that, he said, "certain things are true." But real math, he continued, was
less about knowing the right answers, and more about "I'm going to
try this out, conjecture, and revise," and that was what he was trying
to share with his students. Working with Mr. Collins had been a god-
send, he said, because Mr. Collins "set the tone for collaboration— math
is about you seeing random things and trying to make sense of them;
he very much set the expectation that math is something students do
rather than something they receive."
Mr. Collins's and Mr. Martin's students appreciated this attitude.
They told us that "just so you know, this school sucks— they care more
about the rules than the education," but added "[the two math teachers)
are awesome." Why is that, we asked? One Latina girl explained, "When
we get frustrated, he knows we are thinking hard. I know that he cares
about us. He uses a different form of grading — a rubric- {that empha-
sizes] effort and reasoning. It is different from doing problems and
seeing whether we get the right answer. He cares about us and our
learning: When we get too frustrated, he tells us to take a drink and
take a walk." An African American student added, "This class is dif-
ferent because we are thinking more like mathematicians. ... Math is
about finding different ways of understanding something, and looking
for patterns." Adds a third, "This class is great, At ++. They really care
about whether we learn, this class involves a lot of playing with num-
bers, when we get something they move on, but if we are struggling
they don't tell us, they ask us again and again, give us different prob-
lems, they are always asking us to think. They show that they care by
always being available at lunch, after school, helping us to think. It's
fun."
Both Mr. Collins and Mr. Martin saw their work in math as not only
about building mathematical interest but also about empowering their
students. As Mr. Martin said, "Our purpose is not to get them into
college; our purpose is to give students power. The idea is to help stu-
dents become mathematicians, which means they have to do what real
mathematicians do-discover, innovate, and meet a real intellectual
need." Thus there is congruence between their approach to math—
which is more about building mathematical identities than about
covering content-and their ultimate goals for their students.
In fact, the only other places where we saw students asked to develop
their own interpretations in math were highly elite settings. At oneLEARNING
qued, was
going to
is trying
n a god-
I-math
if them;
'ents do
titude.
e more
achers]
When
≥ cares
npha-
•S and
d our
k and
s dif-
Ith is
king
care
um-
ling
ob-
: by
It's
Ily
eir
to
u-
It
DEEPER TEACHING
325
highly regarded private school, the Harkness method had been adapted
to math, and every class began with each student writing an answer to
a problem on the board, which other students then built upon and cri-
tiqued. (The school's faculty had also replaced the textbook with mate-
rials they themselves had written, a spiraling curriculum of problems
that they hoped would introduce students to math as an integrated
field-instead of as different, siloed branches, which is how students
often experienced it.) At the Midwestern Math and Science Academy,
an exam school for the strongest math and science students in the state,
students worked in a similar inquiry-oriented way: they were exposed
to the mathematical mysteries in calculus and linear algebra by working
collectively on one hard problem at a time. What Mr. Collins and
Mr. Martin's class demonstrated was that an equivalent approach was
possible with students who were less privileged and entered with less
knowledge of math; it simply required a willingness to recast math in
a way that made it more inviting for these students.
Pedagogically, this meant puzzles, games, and low-floor, high-ceiling
problems, through which the duo sought to advance understanding of
core mathematical content. As Mr. Collins says, "My underlying phi-
losophy is that math and mathematical thinking and solving puzzles is
something which is innately enjoyable. It's not so much that I have to
convince them; it's more that I have to remove the reasons that it's not
coming to life for them." Mr. Collins himself also continued to enjoy
what he called recreational math-games and puzzles that he himself
liked to do— and he brought these in and shared them with the students.
Particularly at the beginning of the year, they made a considerable
effort to reframe the ways in which students experienced math,
which for many had been a painful subject. By reintroducing math as a
field rife with puzzles that could gradually be unraveled, they hoped to
awaken students' mathematical interests. When we asked Mr. Martin
whether, as a first-year teacher, he had had problems with classroom
management, he responded that Mr. Collins had developed a very
strong collaborative culture by creating a "task environment" in which
math is "seen very much as something you do rather than receive"; from
there, his job had simply been to sustain it.
Overall, their teaching illustrates a parallel to what we saw in elec-
tives at Attainment High: if you want to change students' experiences
in core disciplines, you need to change the "what" of what students are326
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
being asked to do. Mr. Collins and Mr. Martin had not found some
magical way to make traditional mathematics more engaging. Rather
they had simply, and significantly, changed the tasks asked of students—
play mathematical games, reason collectively about puzzling math-
ematical conundrums-and, through those processes, they were
gradually teaching topics like discrete mathematics and statistical
analysis. Like other "deeper teachers" in our sample, they led with
authentic complex tasks, and embedded within those tasks the basic
skill-building needed to take on those tasks. They also drew on
Mr. Collins's knowledge of the field to make these selections. Mir-
roring Jerome Bruner's contention that real mastery is the ability to
see the structure of how knowledge is organized in a field, Mr. Col-
lins chose problems or exercises based on his sense of the arc of
mathematical learning in different topical areas.
Mr. Collins had also made changes to his ways of assessing students'
progress and success in his class. Like the organic chemistry teacher at
Attainment High, he had been frustrated by the process of grading
quizzes; giving students a "yo" just seemed to tell them that they weren't
good at math rather than that they were struggling with particular
concepts or subtopics. Instead, like Adam, he had moved toward a
mastery-based system: students were assessed on particular elements
(of math, and, if they did not pass, were given opportunities to do the
material again, with different questions, until they showed mastery of
a particular skill or idea. He also had tried some collective performance
assessments: students worked together to solve problems in a group,
thus modeling on the assessments the same kind of collaborative culture
they were creating in class.
The duo's class also shows what is possible through an apprentice-
ship model of teacher training. While Mr. Martin was part of a teaching
residency program that itself provided significant training, he named
Mr. Collins as by far the most significant influence on his teaching.
They planned together; they debriefed lessons together; and sometimes,
within lessons, they moved from one teaching to the other teaching.
This total immersion helped Mr. Martin see, concretely, what it would
mean to actualize this approach to mathematics, to practice it exten-
sively, and to refine and revise it with actual students. The balance of
the teaching also shifted over time, with Mr. Collins doing most of
the teaching at the beginning of the year and Mr. Martin doing the
DEEPER 1
majorit!
progran
gradual
compet
teacher-
of the 1
show th
Everyth
field, hc
student:
teachers
and errr
tled intr
example
celerate
Kyle Hi
In our
serving
classes s
In afflue
the mos
tion, per
vantager
highly t
progran
"regular
higher-t
author I
dents we
sion que
making.
ture tha
present i
Enter
poverty' LEARNING
ind some
3. Rather
idents-
g math-
=y were
itistical
ed with
e basic
'ew on
• Mir-
lity to
• Col-
irc of
lents'
ler at
ding
ren't
ular
•d a
ints
the
•of
Ice
iP,
re
DEEPER TEACHING
327
majority by the end. This was by design, as part of the "residency"
program; much as in medical residencies, the younger professional
gradually assumes more responsibility as she or he demonstrates
competence. While such an approach is only as good as the "master"
teacher —we saw some pairs where the apprentice had taken on much
of the formulaic approach to teaching of the lead teacher-it does
show the power of co-teaching as a mechanism for learning the craft.
Everything about Mr. Martin-how he talked about the nature of his
field, how he thought about pedagogy, and what he actually did with
students-were qualities that we otherwise observed only in veteran
teachers, who had been through many rounds (and often years) of trial
and error before they unlearned their initial methodology and reset-
tled into a more collaborative, open-ended approach. His is only one
example, but it does show that such a learning curve can be greatly ac-
celerated in the hands of the right mentor."!
Kyle Hogan: Building Skills, Empowering Learners
In our travels, we saw a stark discrepancy between English classes
serving affluent and higher-track students on the one hand, and
classes serving higher-poverty and lower-track students on the other.
In affluent settings, English was frequently the discipline where we saw
the most opportunities for meaning-making, analysis, and interpreta-
tion, perhaps because discussion is the coin of the realm. But in less ad-
vantaged settings, we saw significantly less of this. For example, at one
highly tracked comprehensive high school that included both a magnet
program serving predominantly affluent white and Asian students and a
"regular track" serving predominantly black students, we saw the
higher-track students being asked questions like "What choices did the
author make in organizing the narrative?" while the lower-track stu-
dents were simply reading the story aloud and answering comprehen-
sion questions, with no opportunities for interpretation or meaning-
making. These observations are consistent with a large body of litera-
ture that indicates that opportunities for extended thinking are more
present in higher tracks and more affluent settings.12
Enter Kyle Hogan. Mr. Hogan teaches almost exclusively high-
poverty black and Latinx students in a traditional public school in a328
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
major Northeastern city. His mission in life is not only to educate but
also to empower those students: to build their skills and knowledge,
but also to teach them how to read critically canonical texts as well
as analyze words in all of their forms in the world around them.
Mr. Hogan-who is in his mid-thirties, has a joint master's degree in
philosophy and education, is working on an education doctorate, and
teaches novice English teachers at a well-regarded university- describes
his own practice as only a work in progress. How to integrate skill-
building with critical reading is both the topic of his doctoral thesis
and a lifelong dilemma.
To describe aspects of Mr. Hogan's approach, we focus on a set of
classes about a Ta-Nehisi Coates article, "In Defense of a Loaded
Word."i3 The article, published in the New York Times in November
2013, is a defense of sometimes using the word "nigger," suggesting
that rules regarding usage should not be absolute but rather should
take into account the nature of the context, the race of the speaker,
and the relationships among the parties. The classes described here took
place less than two weeks after the article was published. We describe a
three-class arc: the first one devoted to deciphering the text, the second
to a discussion of it, and the third to an analysis of the form of the
writing.
Mr. Hogan is a thirty-something guy, slim, dressed in a sports jacket and
tie. He has short buzzed hair and the overall impression I get is a bit preppy.
There are twenty students in all. Two are chattering away in what I dis-
cover is Haitian Creole, while others speak in Spanish. There are thirteen
boys and seven girls.
They are sitting around a horseshoe arrangement of tables. Mr. Hogan
jumps right in, reminding the group about the analytic essay due on
Monday. He asks me to introduce myself. When I say that I'm looking for
classrooms where students are learning deeply, a few students clap and
another says, "This is your man."
Mr. Hogan introduces the Coates piece. "We're going to talk about his
central argument-which he doesn't state directly! I don't really know
what he's saying-so you're going to help figure it out, and to figure out
why he doesn't just say it flat out," he says. A student responds, "You really
don't know what he's saying? Because then I ain't gonna be able to figure
it out either." The students laugh.
DEE
quir
mel
cho
h
Y
tl
e
N
pap
this
eds
are.
TI
stra
para
gett
the
of ti
folle
som
outs
M
wha
Mr. I
"Tha
what
that
M
then
tion,
call r
studi
direc
key sARNING
ite but
ledge,
s well
hem.
ee in
, and
ribes
kill-
resis
it of
ded
ber
ing
uld
er,
ok
з а
le
d
DEEPER TEACHING
329
Mr. Hogan smiles but moves forward with the task, and the group
quickly quiets down. He directs the group to look at the writing assign-
ment due next Monday, which is a choice between two prompts. The
choice involving the Coates article is as follows:
In his essay, Coates never states his thesis directly; instead, he implies
his central argument by building ideas from paragraph to paragraph.
Your task is to state Coates' central argument in your own words and
then defend, challenge, or qualify it. Support your argument with
evidence from your reading, observation, and experience.
Mr. Hogan says that the New York Times is "the most challenging daily
paper," and holds up a copy. "Some people make fun of me because I have
this delivered to my house every day," he says. He then explains what op-
eds are: "Most of the newspaper is factual stories, but at the back there
are arguments and opinions."
The class starts to look at the essay. "We're going to use a reading
strategy where in a few words you summarize what he's saying in each
paragraph.... We've done this before. We'll do the first paragraph to-
gether and then I'm going to let you work in groups or on your own with
the rest." Mr. Hogan pauses after a few sentences and asks what one
of the sentences mean, and several students help to clarify. Mr. Hogan
follows up: "Does anyone else have this experience that they're called
something in your family that would be uncomfortable if someone from
outside the family called you?" There are loud assents.
Mr. Hogan asks students to turn and talk with their partner about
what the first paragraph is about. There is one minute of conversation;
Mr. Hogan then asks what students came up with. A boy raises his hand:
"That relationships with different people affect your language in terms of
what you call them?" Another student adds: "The fact that other people
that might not be as close to him call him dad is a problem."
Mr. Hogan asks if they want to do another paragraph together and
there are some murmurs of assent. He leads them through the next sec-
tion, feeding them questions: "What is he implying here? ... If I were to
call my wife 'baby' is that okay? What about if you called her baby?" One
student says that he thinks this article is about the n-word and Mr. Hogan
directs them to look back at the title. Mr. Hogan ask students to put the
key sentence of the second paragraph in their own words: "Right names330
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
depend on right relationships," one student offers. Mr. Hogan prompts
the students to annotate all of their thoughts and responses in the mar-
gins of the text. With the first two paragraphs done, Mr. Hogan releases
his students to spend ten to fifteen minutes working through the rest of
the article.
I sit down with two boys, who tell me that they find this strategy to be
very useful-"because later I can look back on it and see what I was
thinking, since we're going to write an essay on it and stuff." I come back
to the pair where I have stationed my computer. They have finished the
next two paragraphs and tell me what they think: "He hints at how race
might have to do with how we use the n-word," one of them tells me. They
have underlined lots of words and drawn arrows to their annotations in
the margins. I turn to the other side and talk to a student who is working
on his own. He says that he thinks Coates is in between thinking that the
word is and isn't acceptable, referring to a paragraph that describes how
frequently the n-word recurs in black music and culture. I move to a pair
of girls who affirm that they find the strategy useful-"| do it on my own,"
she says.
In this first class, we see a highly scaffolded effort to help students
make sense of the text. Recognizing that his students lack dominant
cultural capital, Mr. Hogan explains what the New York Times is and
what an op-ed is. He models by sharing his own enthusiasm for the
Times. And he helps them work through the eleven-paragraph op-ed,
annotating paragraph by paragraph, until they each have developed
their own summary of the piece. In so doing, he is responding to where
the students are-supporting them by breaking a full-length op-ed
into paragraph-long chunks-but not lessening his expectations that
they can read a significant contemporary author and engage with his
ideas. He also models that this is a topic on which there can be different
viewpoints, starting with his opening comment that it is the students'
job to help him make sense of the essay.
A day later, we return for the discussion of the Coates text:
Mr. Hogan begins: "What l'd like to do is have a discussion about whether
you agree, disagree, or want to qualify his claim, but before we do that
you need to know what his claim was. Try to write it down in a sentence
or two." | walk around-it seems that roughly half of the students have
grasped at least the idea that Coates is defending the n-word as a choice
DEEPER T
that bla
continut
lenge" a
argumer
student:
"qualify,
"Let's
STUDEN
to use c
say to e
about it
MR. HOr
Raise yc
STUDEN
MR. HO
saying a
STUDEN
STUDEN
tain per
MR. HO
STUDEN
was say
n-word
agree v
tion no
-er and
with ce
MR. HO
pend ol
think tr
STUDEN
white f
strange
MR. HC
people
STUDEr
notatic
becausING
pts
ar-
ies
of
as
sk
le
'y
n
9
DEEPER TEACHING
33I
that black people can make in certain contexts. Mr. Hogan has put a
continuum on the board, running from "defend" to "qualify" to "chal-
lenge" and says that students who think they have a sense of the central
argument should put their initials in the appropriate column. A number of
students get up and do so. A bunch of them fall between "defend" and
"qualify," with only two toward "challenge."
"Let's start talking about this," Mr. Hogan says.
STUDENT 1: "I believe that he's arguing that in certain situations you have
to use certain words. ... There are certain graces that we are allowed to
say to each other. If you say the n-word to Jamal, he might get offensive
about it….. the coach was using the word in an aggressive way."
MR. HOGAN: "Do you think that [student 1] is correct in his asséssment?
Raise your hand if so."
STUDENT 2: "I think he says that certain words are for certain people."
MR. HOGAN: "Does anyone think they understand what [student 2] is
saying and can paraphrase it?"
STUDENT 3: "It's like the example of calling your spouse, 'baby'..."
STUDENT 2: "No. I think he's saying that certain words are meant for cer-
tain people."
MR. HOGAN: "What's been said so far and what do you want to add to it?
STUDENT 4: "[Student 1] was saying that it's mostly race... and [student 2]
was saying that depending on race you can't say certain things like the
n-word or spic, but [student 3] says it depends on the relationship, and I
agree with that. There are certain words that hold a negative connota-
tion no matter what. With the n-word there is a difference between the
-er and the -a. I think that Coates thinks that language does have to do
with certain words and certain situations that you're put in."
MR. HOGAN: "Can we agree that Coates is saying the words we use de-
pend on the situation?" Students say yes. "So to what extent does Coates
think that race is part of the situation?"
STUDENT 5: "I think it's just about the relationship.... I mean, if I have a
white friend who calls me that, I'm not gonna care, but if it's a random
stranger I would."
MR. HOGAN: "Do you think that Coates would think it's okay for black
people to use the n-word in some situations and context?"
STUDENT 6: "I thought he was saying that that word holds a negative con-
notation, so I think he would say it's never okay even for people of color
because it brings back the history."332
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
MR. HOGAN: "So we need to go back to the text because we have some
disagreement here about what Coates is saying. We need to figure this
out."
STUDENT 7: "Generally, I think he thinks that in some situations he thinks
it's okay." [He reads a quote from the text.]
STUDENT 8: "I feel like he's trying to say that it's okay when there's an "a"
but it can go back to something negative otherwise.... I think it's not neg-
ative when you use it among your type of race."
MR. HOGAN: "Does Coates think that?"
STUDENT 9: "I think so, because right here it says"— and he offers a quote
from the text _"When Matt Barnes used the word 'niggas' he was being
inappropriate. When Richie Incognito and Riley Cooper used 'nigger, they
were being violent and offensive."
STUDENT 10: "I agree because he's saying that the n-word for when some
races use it is like a symbol of saying that they've overcome something...
like in the last line, 'It tells white people that, for all their guns and all their
gold, there will always be places they can never go.' So no matter what the
white people do they will never be able to use that word in the same way."
In this discussion, we see the students grappling with the complexi-
ties of Coates's argument. The students' comments build on one another;
there is some "barn-raising" in the way that the students' cumulative
responses create an increasingly complex argument. They consider the
questions of whether different races can and should use the word,
whether "nigger" is different from "nigga," and how, if at all, context
and relationships shape when the word should be used. The exclusively
black and Latinx students are also unself-conscious about saying the
word, even in front of a white teacher, and have no trouble developing
an analytic discussion on a potentially very sensitive topic. Finally,
unlike the Waiting for Godot pattern that we described in Chapter I-
where teachers promised that the "deeper" day was coming on some
unspecified future date-here the unpacking work of the previous class
becomes a platform for a deeper discussion of ideas.
In a third class, Mr. Hogan prompts the students to think more about
the structure of the argument than its content, which leads into their
writing assignment:
"We're going to start by talking about whether Coates's implied thesis
was effective, and then we're going to focus on your introduction andING
me
his
iks
'a"
9-
te
:y
e
DEEPER TEACHING
333
thesis paragraphs," he says. He says that the homework is to write a draft
of the introduction to their argument essay.
"When I say implied thesis, what do I mean?" Mr. Hogan asks. "What
his intention is-what he's implying to other people," a student says. "If
you imply something you don't say it-like you don't actually say it." Adds
another. "You're hinting at it; it's subliminal," says another. "Subliminal is
going too far," Mr. Hogan says.
"If we take a look at his first paragraph," Mr. Hogan says, and gestures
for them to look at the text, "Do we see a thesis statement there? No.
So what I want you to do is to write-on a scale of zero to five-write
whether you like his implied thesis." A student asks, "What is his implied
thesis?"
Student: "I think what he's saying is that saying niggers depends who
you are ... it depends who you are and who you have a relationship with —
if I'm a Negro and I say nigger then it's one thing, but if I'm white, it's like
not okay."
Mr. Hogan asks the students to turn and talk about where they sit on
the one-to-five scale in terms of how effective they found Coates's im-
plied thesis. Mr. Hogan asks students to share out loud what their part-
ners were saying, and asks one student to summarize what his partner said.
STUDENT 1: "What she said is because his writing have [sic] too much in-
formation-it started far away and it's not connected and it confuse
people a lot. The point he makes is there but because of the connections
it's not as clear."
MR. HOGAN: "So tell me if this is right: you've got a bunch of different
stories and they are too far from the central point?"
STUDENT 2: "I'm in the middle because it's like it's good what he says but
he taking too long to get to the point."
MR. HOGAN: What would you have preferred that he did?
STUDENT 2: "In the end he shoulda just stated his fact and went to the
point."
STUDENT 3: "I think the stories and all the stuff does match-you just have
to put thought into what he's saying. All the stories he gave about Matt
Barnes and stuff are all prime examples of relationships and where it's
coming from and how it works. I'm still not exactly sure what he's getting
at so that's why l'm at a 2.5. It's basically like a riddle to me."
MR. HOGAN: "When you think about the effect, do you think he intention-
ally put his thesis under the surface to make you think?"334
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
STUDENT 4: "I feel like in order to prove his point he had to give different
examples of different situations-I think he's trying to get the reader to
see it from a different point of view rather than just one so they could
choose which one they agree with the most."
The discussion continues and then Mr. Hogan prompts them to begin
work on their own essays. The prompt is to "state Coates' central argu-
ment and then to defend, qualify, or challenge what Coates is saying." In
preparation for this task, they look at an AP English test essay from a stu-
dent from the year before. Mr. Hogan asks them to analyze it, not for
the specifics but for the structure of how the author has organized the
text. One student says that "you should have a thesis-explain your
opinion on the subject." "Does Coates do that?" Mr. Hogan asks. "No,"
says the student. "So we want to keep that in mind-putting your argu-
ment first is more of a guideline, since writing is an art, not like in math
where two plus two is four no matter where in the world you go."
I talk with two students who are still confused about the argument-
they are looking back at the passage to figure it out. Mr. Hogan projects
one student's intro on the document camera for the class to read-by a
Latino student who was working on his intro yesterday during a study hall:
In the passage, "In defense of a loaded word," the writer, Ta-Nahesi
Coates, argues that when it comes to a solid relationship between
two people, they have certain rights to call one another any name
they feel comfortable with. More specifically, name calling can im-
pact the relationship with one another negatively or positively, de-
pending on how the other person reacts to the name calling. Others
might say using expletives has no place in civilized relationships.
Ultimately I think this language can be offensive but it is up to the
individual to decide with consideration to whether this language is
appropriate or not.
Mr. Hogan prompts students to use this as an inspiration and to keep
going. "The best way to write a good paper is to write a bad first draft-you
just have to go for it," he says.
In this third lesson, Mr. Hogan shifts the focus from the content of
Coates's argument to the nature of persuasive writing. One reason he
DEEPER *
had chc
frequen
thesis, :
tool, M
pushed
real wr
that is
the wo
only ar
In our
kins's"
to shor
and wi
difficu
Mr.
cognit
Thus 1
glish e
what t
dents
thus t
of the
studer
consis
throu
writin
Hor
teache
point.
"the a
stude
think
ultim:
tions,
able, :
"Well
unsul
the bNG
it
DEEPER TEACHING
335
had chosen the Coates text was that it differed from what students were
frequently taught in school about essay writing: it did not lead with a
thesis, and, in fact, the thesis was never directly stated. As a teaching
tool, Mr. Hogan saw the implied thesis as having double benefits- it
pushed his students to decipher the argument, and it showed them that
real writing does not always conform to the hamburger-essay template
that is so familiar in school. In so doing, he was inducting them into
the world of real writers, where there is no fixed template, but rather
only an intentionality about the effects of different authorial choices.
In our interview with him, Mr. Hogan, unprompted, cited David Per-
kins's "whole game at the junior level" as key to his thinking: he wanted
to show students the "whole game" of professional persuasive writing
and within that have them practice the parts that were particularly
difficult.
Mr. Hogan also was seeking to support the transfer of skills that
cognitive scientists have identified as a critical component of mastery.
Thus he had students read both the Coates and the former AP En-
glish example for their structures, then he asked them to think about
what they implied for their own writing. In a meta-move, the stu-
dents were writing an essay about the nature of another essay, and
thus they were having to make the same choices that they were asking
of the author they were reading. Mr. Hogan ends by encouraging
students to see their work as just the first draft of their thinking,
consistent with the idea that production of worthy products comes
through multiple drafts and revisions, another meta-lesson about the
writing process.
How did Mr. Hogan come to teach this way? Like many of the other
teachers in our sample, he had taken a significant journey to reach this
point. He was, he told us, initially shaped by what Dan Lortie called
"the apprenticeship of observation," because his own experiences as a
student had "a huge effect" on his initial practice as a teacher. 4 The
thinking was that "we would look at literature and discuss it and
ultimately come to what seemed like reasonable, supported interpreta-
tions, and when we weren't coming to what struck me as these reason-
able, supported interpretations, I didn't know what else to do but say,
'Well, here it is." That led to "student assessments that looked more like,
unsurprisingly, regurgitation." He also remembers that he just taught
the books that were assigned from the curriculum, and that, at the336
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
beginning, it felt like the question was how was he going to fill up all
the classes in the school year.
Over time, he had reflected more on what his actual, as opposed to
inherited, goals were for students. As part of this reflection, he went
on a college tour, where he followed up with his former students as well
as a number of their professors and asked them what they were strug-
gling with in college. He found that "students weren't struggling at the
next level because they couldn't read and understand Hamlet." The
problem, he discovered, was not so much whether they could remember
this text or that one, but rather "what was holding them back was their
ability to critically read, analyze what they were reading, make argu-
ments, and synthesize a variety of [ideas] into their viewpoints." Thus,
he realized, if he had limited time with students, while exposing them
to a variety of texts was still important, the most important thing he
could do was to take enough time with each text to make sure that stu-
dents built up their abilities to analyze, interrogate, and write, which
were portable skills that they would need in college.
At the same time, Mr. Hogan coupled this hard-headed analysis with
a desire to induct students into his own love of all things text. Mr. Hogan
described himself as "having an obsession with the written word... I
just love reading and writing in essentially every genre." Shakespeare,
Proust, Dickinson, Baldwin, Coates, fiction and nonfiction, historical
and contemporary, were all of interest to Mr. Hogan. He continued to
read voraciously, bringing new texts to class as he got interested in them
and thought they would spark something for the students. He described
himself as having a "pedagogical lens" on everything he sees: "When I
read the newspaper, when I watch a movie, when I see an ad, I'm al-
most always thinking, at least in the back of my mind, 'How might this
fit into my teaching?' Mr. Hogan's students described gradually
adopting this attitude themselves; as one reported, "I used to just like
see ads and not think about it and now I think about how they're
targeting certain audiences."
As someone with a master's degree from a divinity school, Mr.
Hogan saw teaching as an almost spiritual endeavor, a "calling" of
sorts. In an interview with Sarah, he flatly disputed Jal's account from
a previous book that teaching should professionalize along the lines of
medicine or law, because those dry fields, in his view, did not compare
to teaching:DEEPER TEACHING
337
I think there's really something missing there. I think it's more like
teachers as architects where there's a more artistic component,
teachers as ministers where you have this more spiritual com-
ponent, almost a more theological component.... It's a way of
living in the world in the same way that I think some religious folks
would argue that they wake up every morning and look at the
world through a lens of what would the Honorable Prophet Mu-
hammad do or what would the Buddha do or what would Jesus do.
Teaching is an identity, a way of being in the world, a way of seeing
the world that means that my teaching is going to inform the way
that I'm looking at almost everything outside of school. Simi-
larly, the things that I encounter outside of school are really going
to be informing the choices that I make as a teacher.
Thus, he concluded, "Dewey was right" when he said that school was
not preparation for the real world. But rather, "for students who are here
hours and hours and hours every day, this is the real world. Then that's
when I want to make this world-which is part of the real world; it's
the real world for me and them for much of our lives-I want to make
it vital to their experience as human beings."
These convictions organized many of Mr. Hogan's choices. The
essential question for the year was, "How do you use literacy skills to
influence change in your life and the lives of others?" a question he
picked because he wanted to show students the way in which litera-
ture could be a force for social mobility. Within that overarching
purpose, he looked for texts that would likely both be of interest to
the students and embody issues of "perennial" or vital interest. He
then gave himself some flexibility to pick texts as the interests of the
class developed:
Okay now might be an excellent time to bring in Judith Ortiz
Cofer, "The Myth of the Latin Woman." This might be a good
time to bring in-we've already done some stuff with Richard
Rodriguez. This might be a good time to bring in Randall Ken-
nedy out of Harvard who writes about our use of the N-word. It
might be a time to bring in Anzaldúa. At that point, I can say,
"Okay. Now I can connect some of these classic pieces to the Coates
piece and do a sort of thematic unit on language."338
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
Far from his initial practice of moving lockstep through a set of pre-
assigned texts, he now felt the rhythm of the class and thought about
which texts would best expand its web of knowledge. If the job of the
Deweyan teacher is to connect the web of knowledge in learners' heads
to the tree of knowledge in the world, he used his wide-ranging knowl-
edge of literature to pick texts that would likely extend their growing
understanding.
Mr. Hogan also had grappled with how exactly to make the skill-
building piece come alive. Many classes began with some vocabulary
words-for example, juxtaposition, antithesis, delectable- which he
challenged students to use and combine. Examples offered were: "the
antithesis of dapper is frumpy"; "the antithesis of brief is long-winded";
"two antithesis foods such as broccoli and fried chicken in juxtaposi-
tion to each other make the broccoli seem less delectable" (students
cheer because the sentence contains all three words). By making vocab-
ulary playful, inviting students to consider different ways of using the
words, Mr. Hogan was trying to show them that these weren't just words
to be memorized but rather they could use them in different ways as
writers. One powerful "aha" for Mr. Hogan was his discovery that re-
framing grammar as an instrument of power enabled him to see how
to integrate it with his other goals. "When I stopped seeing grammar
as rightness and more as making choices to express ideas, that really
helped-at first I just couldn't see how to integrate it at all. So a lot of
the beginning of the year is setting up what the classroom means for
us as people who want to be successful in an unjust world—we need to
be able to make a choice about the kind of language we use to make
sure that we're able to use it to further our purposes."
Finally, Mr. Hogan's experiences had led him to take a different
stance than many of the other teachers we interviewed. While many
other teachers in our sample, encouraged by today's data-saturated
climate, tended to reflect on what their students did not know how to
do, Mr. Hogan started with a conviction that students' thinking was
often ahead of their writing: "Students are ready to think deeply
about issues of public discourse—-they're ready for that intellectually
but they're not at a place where they know that you're supposed to put
a comma before the coordinating conjunction when you have two in-
dependent clauses." Thus while for many teachers the common pat-
tern we saw was "Bloom as ladder"-do the lower-order tasks now
D
C
f