8 me
Mastery, Identity, Creativity, and the
Future of Schooling
ScHooLINg TODaY seeks a different future, but is heavily constrained
by its past. Efforts to create twenty-first-century skills sit uncomfort-
ably on top of a U.S. educational system that, at its foundation, is still
employing a late-nineteenth-century grammar of schooling. While the
research for this book was conducted in the United States, the dilemma
is global-educators and officials in many countries are trying to re-
think inherited practices in order to create learners ready to meet the
challenges of the modern world. When we offered an executive educa-
tion program on deeper learning at Harvard in the summer of 2017,
the majority of our enrollees were international; they too were searching
for ways to integrate rigor with joy, precision with passion, mastery with
identity and creativity.
What should we tell them? The lessons from this book are necessarily
partial; no one has it all figured out. But what we found, perhaps, was a
path forward: we found a series of forays, at the level of classrooms,
extracurriculars, clubs, and sometimes whole schools, that, in one way
or another, were trying to move away from old realities and toward
new and powerful learning environments. American public schools
are in the early days of their journey toward deeper learning; old prac-
tices are still entrenched in many ways! We have a public system that
was founded on the idea of teaching as transmission, and on an indus-
trial model devoted to sorting and batch-processing students. What
we witnessed were a series of efforts to break away from those realities
and establish something new. But such efforts are themselves embry-
362MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
363
onic. Different individuals and institutions are beginning to put in
place different pieces of the puzzle, but the creation of an integrated
whole is still very much a work in progress.?
At the same time, a few things became clear to us: across our dif-
ferent powerful learning environments there were important common-
alities; among our deeper teachers there was a shared stance and often
a remarkably similar journey; and across our successful schools there
was a common set of elements that allowed them to translate espoused
visions into enacted practices. There was also agreement on the ways
in which the broader system was inhibiting efforts to enact deeper
learning. To this end, many of our most successful examples (electives,
clubs, extracurriculars, charter schools) were in some ways buffered
from the external system and its current demands. Thus the critical
questions became: What would it take to make the exception the rule? How
might we create a system where it wouldn't be necessary to work against the
grain to be successful?
In the pages that follow, we take up these questions. Our thesis can
be captured in one sentence: We need to change student learning, so we need
to change schools, so we need to change systems. We advance this argument
by working outward in concentric circles. We begin by exploring what
we learned about the nature of powerful learning experiences. Then
we turn to teachers and teaching, asking what kinds of preparation
and career trajectories they would need to lead such experiences.
Then we move to schools, considering what kinds of leadership, cul-
ture, norms, processes, and organizational designs they would need
to support such learning for both students and teachers. Finally, we
move outward to the system level, considering how we might remake
policies and structures to support such work closer to the ground. We
include a discussion of politics and values because the question of
whether or how to transform our country's schools is not in the end a
technical one, but one related at its core to how we see the purpose of
education.
What follows is not intended as an all-or-nothing proposition. While
we lay out the changes that would need to happen at each level to create
a system oriented toward deep learning, individual teachers, adminis-
trators, schools, teacher-preparation institutions, and others can take
some concrete steps in this direction without waiting for wholesale
system change. The United States has more than 13,000 districts and304
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
almost 100,000 public schools within a fairly decentralized system of
governance. This frustrates those who desire rapid and centralized
change, but it also creates opportunities for a deeper-learning agenda
to flourish in different corners as it acquires local political support. We
can well imagine the change looking more like a social movement or
an Othello board, where, as some places flip toward deeper learning,
momentum builds for similar change in surrounding classrooms,
schools, or districts.
The Nature of Powerful Learning Environments
Across the variety of settings that we studied, some clear commonali-
ties emerged among those learning environments that students and
teachers described as the most powerful. In all of these environments,
learning started with a purpose— something that was not preparation
for life later but could grab the interest of a young person in the present.
Students were treated as producers, that is, as people who could offer
interpretations, solve problems, develop products of value, and other-
wise create in ways consistent with the norms of the field or discipline.
Subjects were treated as open-ended rather than closed; there was a
belief that what students were discovering or creating had significant
value, not that knowledge had been previously discovered and needed
only to be transmitted. Students were invited to "play the whole game
at a junior level"—-that is, while there were opportunities to work in
depth on particular subsections, students were immersed in whole
projects, such as putting on a production, designing experiments, or
engaging in mathematical problem-solving. While traditional classes
used an "I do /we do /you do" formula, powerful learning environ-
ments gradually transferred ownership of the process of learning it-
self. Such a shift could empower students either individually or in small
groups-as in the projects at Dewey High, or the self-paced organic
chemistry modules or design projects at Attainment High-or it could
empower the group collectively, as in Mr. Fields's philosophy classes,
Harkness tables at Exeter, or the student production team in Servant of
Two Masters. While traditional classes often had only two roles-
teacher and student— powerful learning environments built communi-
ties of learners in which students could teach as well as learn, capital-MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
305
izing on both the distributed expertise that exists in any group of
learners and the motivational benefits of peer-to-peer learning. These
powerful learning environments were also cognitively challenging.
"This is the class that makes my brain hurt" was a refrain we heard
more than once. At the same time, they were also passionate places
where the passion sustained students' motivation when the learning
was hard. To enable these experiences, the teachers had carefully built
communities that were challenging yet vulnerable, where students
sought to give their best but were willing to be wrong.
Such environments also tended to mobilize two very different sets
of virtues. In their emphasis on intrinsic motivation, creativity, and stu-
dent empowerment, these environments evoked liberal or romantic
virtues-and, in so doing, stayed consistent with the Rousseauian meta-
phor of learning as more "igniting a fire" than "Alling a container." At
the same time, these were places that emphasized classical virtues. They
had real standards for learning and emphasized the importance of prac-
tice, revision, and repetition to get work exactly right. Whether it was
Mr. Simmons having students move forward in organic chemistry only
after they had shown complete command of the previous unit, students
developing draft after draft of their projects at Dewey High in prepa-
ration for public exhibitions, or the Servant production team patiently
refining the angle of an actor's foot, there was a fierce attention to
detail and an insistence on mastery.
In other words, the most powerful learning experiences we observed
were neither at the progressive pole of self-guided learning nor at the
conservative extreme of direct instruction. Rather, they assumed
the model of apprenticeship or induction, in which students became
motivated by a domain and worked to develop or make something
within that domain, but did so under the watchful eye of expert men-
tors." Our findings are consistent with two recent syntheses of
decades of work on project-based learning and problem-based or
inquiry-oriented learning, both of which find that such modes can have
strongly positive results if (and only if) they are organized with appro-
priate scaffolding and necessary direction from more knowledgeable
others.' John Hattie's meta-analysis of practices aligned with effective
teaching similarly emphasizes a number of the elements that we identify
here, including the importance of feedback, deliberate practice, and
scaffolding.366
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
In emphasizing this duality, we seek to integrate two very different
traditions of school commentary. On the one hand, this study builds
on a long lineage of progressive figures- from J. M. Rice in the 1890s
to John Goodlad in the ig8os— who at different points over the past
120 years have similarly argued that schools are unnecessarily stulti-
fying places where textbooks, bell schedules, and the view of teaching
as transmission cut students off from the enlivening possibilities of
learning. On the other hand, this study also draws from work on ex-
pertise (which emphasizes practice and feedback from knowledgeable
others); the notion that fields possess standards that guide the creation
of good work (we can see this in IB, among other places); and the old-
fashioned idea that things of quality can be produced only through sig-
nificant amounts of hard work, practice, and revision. In so doing, we
offer a bridge across ideological divides, and suggest that powerful
learning environments integrate elements from what are frequently
seen as opposed positions?
We also suggest that deep learning accrues over time through an
upward spiral of mastery, identity, and creativity. Our argument is that
there is a cycle that integrates developing one's knowledge and skill
in a domain (mastery), becoming deeply and personally invested in
that domain (identity), and trying to make or do something fresh
in that domain rather than simply receiving knowledge passively (cre-
ativity). Over time, students play the "whole game" at more and more
complex levels, participating in the same activities but at increasing
levels of sophistication. We saw this clearly in our observations of extra-
curricular activities; a similar theory of learning was at work in project-
based schools that emphasized multiple cycles of revision as students
worked toward a culminating project.
It is also important to name what we are not arguing. As should be
apparent, deep learning is not synonymous with student-centered
learning, project-based learning, blended learning, or competency-
based learning. These are modalities of learning that can be either deep
or shallow in practice. We think of mastery, identity, and creativity as
rather stringent criteria against which particular learning experiences
can be evaluated. In advancing this argument, we are seeking to give
some teeth to what it means to learn "deeply," creating a demanding
standard to which students, teachers, and other stakeholders can
aspire.
M
E
fi
a
F
t
t
t
t
t
i
€
t
1
tARNING
ifferent
builds
: 18005
se past
stulti-
aching
ties of
on ex-
yeable
eation
e old-
h sig-
g, we
erful
ently
h an
that
skill
d in
resh
cre-
nore
sing
tra-
ect-
nts
be
ed
•y-
ep
as
es
ve.
1g
.N
MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
367
Expanding a Parallel "Grammar" of Schooling
Our adoption of an apprenticeship perspective also sheds light on why
we found electives and extracurriculars to be such promising platforms
for learning. David Tyack and Larry Cuban have powerfully argued
that the core "grammar" of schooling— featuring teaching as trans-
mission, age-graded classrooms, short blocks—is not hospitable to
powerful modes of learning.® But what Tyack and Cuban missed is that
in high schools there is a second, parallel grammar that many students
are experiencing every day, one with many characteristics that make it
promising for learning: purpose, choice, community, interdependent
roles, learning with heart and hands as well as head, apprenticeship, and
the "whole game at the junior level." While books like The Adolescent
Society and The Shopping Mall High School have faulted the periphery for
distracting students from the academic core, our account suggests that
the core might have much to learn from the periphery when it comes
to organizing learning experiences.
Part of what makes this parallel "grammar" so promising is that it
connects to longer and older traditions of learning, particularly tradi-
tions of apprenticeship. Efforts to transform learning in core disciplines
to make students more active learners date only to Dewey and his dis-
ciples beginning a century ago, and, as we have seen, these efforts have
proceeded in fits and starts, never having been really tried on any scale
in public schools. By contrast, learning in theater and debate goes back
at least to the Greeks, and thus we have millennia of aggregated knowl-
edge about how best to prepare aspiring actors or debaters to enact
their craft. These traditions are unambiguous that learning must happen
through doing, that trying and failing is a necessary part of improve-
ment, and that coaching and feedback from more skilled others is crit-
ical for learning. These fields have also developed structures that create
rhythm to the learning, a set of roles that are endemic to the field, and a
technical language that allows people to communicate with precision,
all of which are linked to the adult work that it emulates. These char-
acteristics either do not exist or are less developed when it comes to the
teaching of core disciplinary subjects; that area has much catching up
to do if it is to provide the same kind of infrastructure that supports
peripheral modes of learning.368
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
Recognizing the importance of extracurriculars also has important
equity implications. Opportunities to participate in these arenas are un-
equally distributed; low-income students are three times as likely as
their non-poor counterparts "to participate in neither sports nor clubs"
(30 percent versus 1o percent); some research suggests that this gap
is widening over time in concert with growing income inequality? In
the high-poverty school where we studied debate, it was the only non-
sports extracurricular offered, in contrast to the vast array of options
at Attainment High. Our research suggests that equalizing opportuni-
ties to powerful learning experiences across race and class lines requires
paying significant attention to inequities in these peripheral spaces as
well as to inequities in core academic classes.
Unlearning and Double Loop Learning
Our study also suggests that achieving these challenging integrations
will require as much unlearning as learning. For traditional comprehen-
sive high schools, it will be impossible to realize powerful learning
environments without giving something up. For example, the rush of
teaching and testing for enormous amounts of content in various sub-
jects, with all that entails, would need be to be rethought if the goal were
to give students a deeper learning experience in those subjects. Such a
goal would also require teachers to rethink what are, for some, funda-
mental aspects of their identities, moving from deliverers of content and
repositories of knowledge to skillful facilitators of deep explorations into
particular domains.
Schools that are committed to particular thematic approaches-
exemplified by Dewey High's commitment to projects and No Excuses
High's emphasis on traditional modes of achievement-gain part of
their collective identity not only by what they are but also by what they
are not. This can make it difficult to incorporate part of the other into
their approach. These schools tend to be good at what Chris Argyris
called "single loop learning," which he defines as getting better within
one's existing paradigms and goals. " So, for example, we once visited a
ITo-excuses school and asked the leader what the school was working
on, and he said, "Our scholars are using forty-four of the forty-nine
minutes of a period productively; we'd like to get that up to forty-seven
MASTER
minut
were g
calls ",
goals i
their
their
ments
and p
admir
ensur
ects, i
word.
takin
these
DNA
thus 1
At
achie
and e
thro
the li
no-e
sult i
that
they
are s
com
ogn:
buil
resp
dial
inos
2011
If w
fori
achR LEARNING
important
as are un-
i likely as
lor clubs"
this gap
ality.' In
nly non-
options
portuni-
requires
paces as
ations
ehen-
ring
ish of
sub-
S-
ses
of
ey
to
in
a
g
e
MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
369
minutes." This is textbook single loop learning. But what our schools
were gradually realizing was that they needed to engage in what Argyris
calls "double loop learning," which requires questioning fundamental
goals and paradigms. At No Excuses High, school leaders realized that
their overwhelming emphasis on control strategies was inhibiting
their students' ability to function in the more open-ended environ-
ments of college, so they were trying to incorporate more self-directed
and project-based learning. Conversely, at Dewey High, teachers and
administrators were realizing that sometimes they were struggling to
ensure that foundational skills were being built through students' proj-
ects, and that conventional data should not be considered a four-letter
word. Noticing and naming these absences was one thing, but really
taking them on was quite another because much of the worldview of
these schools-their existing systems, culture, and organizational
DNA- was bound to a seemingly ironclad set of commitments. Change
thus requires significant undoing and unlearning.
At the same time, while such changes will undoubtedly be difficult,
achieving these integrations is arguably the central challenge for schools
and even entire educational systems moving forward. As we progressed
through our travels, we found that people were increasingly aware of
the limitations of approaches that emphasized only one side of the coin:
no-excuses networks are now building schools that they hope will re-
sult in more empowered and self-directed learners; East Asian nations
that have been leading the PISA rankings are now interested in whether
they are taking care of their students' mental health and whether they
are sufficiently fostering creativity; and conversely, project-based and
competency-based networks beyond Dewey High are beginning to rec-
ognize the importance of continuous improvement and careful skill-
building, especially if such schools are to realize their aspirations with
respect to equity. We are also encouraged that there seems to be more
dialogue aeross different models. When we began the study in 2010,
inost schools were talking to counterparts similar to themselves; by
2018, many were involved in networks that crossed pedagogical divides.
If we are not simply to continue the pendulum-swinging nature of re-
form, bringing together these opposing qualities will be critical to
achieving lasting success.
relayin370
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
Deeper Teaching
While the schools and networks in our study generally struggled to in-
tegrate these qualities, we did find a number of skillful teachers who
were able to create powerful learning experiences for their students, and
who share some common characteristics:
• Significant and substantive knowledge of their disciplines or
fields;
• A view of these disciplines or fields as open-ended rather than
closed;
• High levels of pedagogical knowledge in their preferred approach
to teaching;
• A stance toward teaching as an act of igniting interest rather
than as an act of transmission;
• One or more "seminal learning experiences" in their pasts that
caused them to view their domains, their students, and their pur-
pose, in this fashion.
Truly knowing their subjects was critical to these teachers. It gave
them the deep understanding that they were trying to give to their stu-
dents; it made them comfortable with ambiguity and not having all the
answers because they were fundamentally secure in their control of
their field; and their passion for their subject engendered student pas-
sion for those same fields. Further, the seminal learning experiences
often came in their junior or senior years of college or in graduate
school. Moving beyond survey courses and actually doing their disci-
pline were key in helping them to understand how knowledge is cre-
ated. That, in turn, helped them to induct students into a fellowship of
people who are part of a given discipline.
Thus while Dan Lortie was right that the lengthy apprenticeship of
observation that future teachers undergo as students is perhaps the most
important impediment to significant change in teaching, he missed that
the opposite can also be true; future teachers' best experiences (in
school, college, or even graduate school) can be the launching point for
a different kind of teaching." Prospective teachers experience dozens
of teachers over the course of their lives, but they are not all equallyARNING
to in-
s who
s, and
or
.ve
u-
of
5-
e
MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
371
influential; even one really good experience can provide the spark for
what teachers are trying to accomplish. Again, an apprenticeship per-
spective is helpful here; all of our most compelling group had been ap-
prenticed by their own most valued teachers into a way of being that
they then sought to pass on to their students.
A related point is that what characterized these teachers was a spe-
cific and particular stance, which was connected to their own disciplinary
or field-specific identities. Their stance encompassed a number of re-
lated ideas— that inspiring charges to become members of the field was
more important than "covering the material" and so depth was more
important than breadth; that students could construct as well as receive
knowledge; that historically marginalized students could achieve in
powerful ways if given the chance; that failure was a critical part-of.
learning; and that discovering how to engage in the overarching pro-
cesses of a field was more important than the acquisition of any par-
ticular piece of knowledge. These stances were born both out of their
own experiences in doing the work of their fields and out of their
experiences with students, which reconfirmed for them that orienting
their teaching in this direction would serve their charges well in the
long run. Given that the systems that they were in did not prioritize
these ends, these teachers had to make what Robert Kegan calls a "sub-
ject to object" shift—in other words, they had to move from being sub-
ject to the expectations of the current system to a stance in which they
took the existing system as "object" and made their own decisions about
whether expected practices and goals would truly support their students'®
learning. In the case of AP teachers, for example, the shift highlighted
the difference between teachers who "taught to the test," and teachers
who had their own goals for the subject matter, saw the test as one con-
straint in their designs, and then developed units that both met their
goals and enabled their students to pass the tests.
The importance of stance and teachers' disciplinary identities com-
plicates Lee Shulman's famous formulation that good teaching involves
substantive knowledge, pedagogical knowledge, and pedagogical con-
tent knowledge. 12 These realms of knowledge are critically important,
but our research suggests that good teaching also needs to be anchored
in a clear vision-of what the work of the relevant discipline or field ac-
tually looks like, as well as in the conviction that students (including
disadvantaged students) are capable sense-makers who can engage in372
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
such work. There is again a parallel here to student learning: much as
was true for students' powerful learning, forging this kind of teaching
identity brings together the cognitive and affective in a powerful way
that can fundamentally orient and shape teachers' trajectories.
How might we more consistently engender these qualities in our
teachers? As we have seen, content knowledge is crucial, thus a critical
starting point is to reduce "out-of-field" teaching by making every
effort to ensure that teachers teach the subjects they actually studied
in college. Our research expands on this point: it shows that teachers
need not only to know the subjects they teach, but also to have had some
experience actually doing the work of their fields or disciplines (much as
teachers in the periphery had experiences in their domains). The impli-
cation is that teacher preparation programs should work with disci-
plinary departments to help their students have real experiences doing
science in labs, writing history based on primary research and original
documents, and in other ways immersing themselves in doing the work
of the fields that they aspire to teach. Much as Finnish teachers have to
complete a research thesis as part of their training, it would be good if
prospective American high school teachers similarly had to produce re-
search-one project focused on an educational problem, overseen by
education school faculty, and one piece of disciplinary research in their
fields, overseen by faculty in the disciplines. For those aiming to teach
less classically academic subjects, such as modern instantiations of voca-
tional education, we would expect that they would spend time similarly
apprenticing in real-world equivalents. The core principle here is not
that teachers need to become more academic, but rather that they need
to immerse themselves in the real-world versions of the subjects they
aspire to teach, which, depending on the domain, may or may not sit
within the university.
With this substantive knowledge in place, the next question concerns
how teachers learn how to teach. The most compelling teachers in our
sample had a median experience level of fifteen years. In part this is un-
avoidable, because it takes time to accrue skill 13 But these teachers also
described very long periods of trial and error, in which their transmis-
sion mode of teaching had to be gradually undone and replaced by a
different mode of pedagogy. The example of Mr. Martin, the first-
year math teacher who had spent a year co-teaching with one of the
strongest teachers in our sample, suggests that this learning trajec-ARNING
uch as
iching
1l way
n our
itical
every
idied
chers
iome
ch as
spli-
isci-
ring
inal
ork
: to
1 if
re-
by
eir
ch
a-
ly
st
d
t
MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
373
tory might be greatly accelerated if new teachers were apprenticed to
master teachers. This relationship was successful in part because it
was true co-teaching the two teachers planned together, taught to-
gether, and debriefed together, with the ratio of teaching gradually
shifting more to the newer teacher over time. Consistent with our
emphasis on apprenticeship as a powerful mechanism for learning,
this example suggests that teachers will best learn to teach from other
teachers.
Formalizing this idea, in the past decade we have seen the creation
of a number of teacher residency programs in cities around the country.
Modeled on medical residencies, the idea is that all new teachers should
spend one year being carefully trained by master teachers. As in the
math case described earlier (which was part of a teacher residency), there
is a gradual transfer of responsibility from the veteran to the new teacher
as the new teacher shows that she can handle different aspects of
teaching. Studies have shown that residency programs can have posi-
tive effects on teacher retention and teacher quality, and help fill
shortages in hard-to-staff subjects! A recent report from the National
Commission on Teaching and America's Future (of which Mehta is a
member) called for every new teacher to complete one year in a resi-
dency program.15
If such residency programs provide promising containers for teacher
training, our research suggests that it is what happens inside these con-
tainers that shapes whether or not teachers learn to teach in ways that
challenge, engage, and empower students. In particular, it is important
that these residencies take a specific stand on the nature of good in-
struction, emphasizing the qualities of the powerful learning environ-
ments that we have described here. The recent movement toward
developing high-leverage practices for teacher education that support
"ambitious" instruction in a variety of disciplines is a step in this direc-
tion, because it is granular, concrete, and inquiry-based in its vision of
good instruction. At the same time, these practices need to become not
ends in themselves, but ways of actualizing broader stances toward
teaching. Our research suggests that helping teachers reflect on and un-
derstand the reasons for these stances (particularly the shift away from
teaching as transmission and toward students as junior-level participants
in their fields) is critical if teachers are going to stand for deeper learning
and teaching.!374
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
This vision, in turn, needs to guide the selection of master teachers
and, when possible, the schools into which new teachers are placed.
Part of the challenge for an apprenticeship vision of deeper instruction
is that most teachers don't teach this way, so having existing teachers
apprentice new teachers into inherited ways of doing things will pro-
duce only more of the same. Thus residency programs need to be se-
lective in their choice of master teachers; this generation's exceptional
teachers need to train what we hope will become the new normal of
the next.I8
Deeper Schools
While there is currently much interest in the preparation of teachers,
learning how to teach "deeply" will not happen in a year. It is also not
reasonable to assume that new teachers, no matter how well prepared,
can change the institutions they enter. Thus a commitment to training
teachers in new ways, if it is to succeed, needs to be coupled with the
building of different types of schools-Deeper schools may also need to
Fethink the grammar of schooling to give students more purpose, more
choice, more community, and other qualities that have proven intrinsic
to deeper learning experiences.
What would such schools look like, and how might they be orga-
nized? Part of what motivated this project was that there was writing
about effective schools, writing about "ambitious" teaching, but little
to nothing on "ambitious schools." We set out to fill this gap, but an-
swers were elusive. We found that most schools were not consistently
able to enact a vision, any vision, because they lacked the organizational
mechanisms that would enable such change. In addition, the schools
we found that did have some consistency in their practices often were
better at realizing some goals of learning than others.
As far as we can tell, then, there appear to be a series of mechanisms
that are critical for mounting an ambitious program of instruction (the
how), but those elements need to be tied to a thick vision of powerful
learning that integrates rigor and joy (the what). Thus, if we were to
advise a future school leader who wanted to build a deeper learning
school, we would suggest that he or she define a vision of learning in
ways that are consistent with our earlier description of the "nature ofG
S
MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
375
powerful learning environments," then enact that vision using the
mechanisms described below.
With respect to the "how," there were some shared characteristics
of those schools that, regardless of their vision, had discovered how to
turn their espoused values into enacted practices. They were:
I. A specific and granular vision of good instruction, which was the
north star to which everything was oriented;
2. Thick mechanisms for adult learning, which enabled all adults in
the building to learn together how to achieve this vision;
3. Symmetry, that is, the ways in which adults worked with and
learned from one another paralleled the ways in which they
hoped students would learn;
4. Visibility, which means that student work (and by implication,
teachers' teaching) was public and shared, which both de-
privatized teaching and created some collective accountability
around the enactment of the instructional vision;
5. A collective identity that connected to the instructional vision and
anchored student and faculty commitment to this way of
working; and
6. An organizational design that aligned all structures in support of
the instructional vision.!9
In comparison to the "effective schools" correlates, these elements are
much more instructionally tied, and together form an intricate web that
can support the enactment of an instructional vision.
Having these elements helped schools move away from the classroom-
to-classroom variation we saw in the vast majority of schools we vis-
ited. By defining a granular instructional vision, the schools featured
in earlier chapters were able to have highly specific conversations about
the nature of good instruction and about what more and less rigorous
versions of this instruction would look like. By creating thick mecha-
nisms for adult learning, they helped to de-privatize teaching, coun-
tering the phenomenon we saw in other schools whereby teachers
knew that other teachers were doing great work but had no access to
understanding how and why they were doing what they did. Symmetry,
that is, the mirroring of the school's values in the design of leadership
and adult learning, was a particularly key ingredient. In one sense, all
schools we visited were symmetrical: in schools where administrators376
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
controlled and distrusted teachers, teachers controlled and dis-
trusted students; in schools where administrators empowered teachers
and treated them as designers (as at Dewey High), teachers more often
treated students as capable and thoughtful human beings. While we
came to think that symmetry was simply a natural property of schools
as social institutions, skillful leaders regarded their work with faculty
as opportunities to model the kinds of interactions they hoped the
teachers would have with their students. Symmetry was also impor-
tant in a more specific sense: teachers can't teach in ways that they
themselves have not experienced, and thus the most skilled school
leaders used professional learning time to give teachers the kinds of
learning experiences that they hoped teachers would recreate in their
classrooms.
The fourth element-visibility of student work-was another mech-
anism to de-privatize the classroom and to act as a check on the rigor
of what was being produced. At Dewey High, this came in the form of
public exhibition of projects. Seeing the work of one's students and one's
colleagues' students not only exerted some modest pressure for perfor-
mance but also promoted collective dialogue among faculty about the
nature of high-quality student work. International Baccalaureate exams
played a similar role at IB High, creating a common scaffold and an-
chor that situated the collective work of the faculty. Building a collec-
tive identity--at Dewey High around projects, at IB High around
making IB possible for non-elite students, and at No Excuses High
around closing the achievement gap-was critical to sustaining moti-
vation, purpose, and energy at these schools. Finally, these schools were
meticulously designed to bring all elements of their structure into align-
ment; everything from hirig to teacher development to assessment
flowed from these schools' Instructionalvision and overall purpose. In
contrast, at most schools we visited, some elements (such as the teacher
evaluation system) were grossly misaligned with other elements (for
example, the professional learning strategy).
In the case of large comprehensive schools, it may be unrealistic to
expect the kind of thoroughgoing alignment around a single instruc-
tional vision that we saw at small charter schools. In these larger schools,
the department can be the right vehicle for deepening instruction. 20 But
what such disciplinary groupings need to do at a departmental level is
largely the same as what certain smaller schools were doing schoolwide.MASTERY, IDENTITY, CREATIVITY
377
The math department at Attainment High, for example, set a specific
and granular vision of instruction, particular to itself, focusing on math-
ematical practices it wanted students to develop, drawing in large part
on Common Core expectations. Because a state assessment based on
the Common Core had not yet been developed, the department
couldn't teach to a test. Instead, they had to work together to define
how the broader Common Core standards would translate to cur-
riculum and teaching, a need that provided a rich opportunity for
dialogue and learning. Over time, many in the department became
enthusiastic about this work and began to draw boundaries between
the new ways of doing math and their older approaches. In so doing,
they developed a collective identity that built motivation and also tied
the department to the larger community of math educators and re-
searchers moving toward reform. There also was a strong and aligned
organizational design to this work, because the department introduced
the new approach in ninth grade and gradually carried it through the
later years.
Cross-cutting these mechanisms was the culture of the schools.
Powerful learning environments that we observed in electives, extra-
curriculars, and core classes had an ethos in which student risk-taking
was the norm, productive struggle was expected, and failure was em-
braced as a critical part of learning. Schools that prioritized these qual-
ities in a symmetrical way in classrooms created a similar culture for
teachers, in which they could make decisions and take risks. Failure was
seen not as a dereliction of duty but as a critical part of learning and
growth. Especially if the goal is for teachers to work in a mode different
from the one in which they have been working, creating a culture that
supports such unlearning and learning is critical.21 With that culture
often comes a flat organizational structure in which decision-making
is shared among faculty; there is a recognition that the wisdom of the
group creates a much stronger platform for learning than knowledge
flowing top-down from the center. Such a culture also brings with it a
changed attitude toward students, whose ideas, interests, and capabili-
ties are to be respected, and who should participate in making some
decisions about their education and their schools. Schools like No
Excuses High, which began, in their history and organizational im-
print, with a very different set of assumptions— emphasizing hierarchy,
control, and fear of failure-would need to undergo a significant process