4 me
International Baccalaureate:
A System for Deeper Learning?
WITH THE WINTER solstice rapidly approaching, the morning sunlight
that filters through the windows of Ms. Walsh's classroom is weak and
almost gray. Outside, the scrubby conifers that surround the south
campus of IB High (a pseudonym) brace and bend in a frigid coastal wind.
Only three days remain until winter vacation; as a result, conversations
in the faculty room and cafeteria are about holiday plans and the possi-
bility of an upcoming snowstorm rather than about what is happening in
classrooms.
As the twenty mixed-ability juniors in Ms. Walsh's "Theory of Knowl-
edge I" course take their seats, however, the energy in the room feels
studious and focused. Several students open laptops and read over the
comments that Ms. Walsh has added to their in-progress essay drafts.
Others pull up their outlines and commiserate about their writing woes.
This is their first attempt at producing the kind of essay that they will write
at the end of next year when they sit for the International Baccalaureate
Theory of Knowledge exam, and for many it is a daunting task. In line with
the heady content of the course, the two essay prompts ask, "Are some
ways of knowledge more or less likely to lead to truth?" and "Can a
machine know?" To respond to these questions, students must explore
and evaluate the four "ways of knowing" that they have studied in the
course thus far: sense perception, imagination, memory, and intuition.
Without apparent prompting, the students quiet down to allow Ms.
Walsh to address them. She is dressed casually, in jeans and a sweater, and
she opens the class informally. "I see little fingers communicating in the
I57I58
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
Google doc," she says. "If you opened your essay and you saw so much
blue, don't panic! We're on the same team, I promise. I'm just trying to
make you better thinkers and writers." She flashes an encouraging smile
at her students. Her fluid movements and deep voice seem to belong as
much on the athletic field as in the classroom-not surprising given that
she has doubled as a coach for most of her twenty-year teaching career.
As Ms. Walsh continues talking, her language too seems to take on a
coaching stance. She reminds students that they should think of this essay
as "the ToK season opener": an important effort to make use of what they
have learned, but also a task that is more about growth than about "get-
ting it right." After clarifying a few questions, she prompts the students
to get to work. "I don't want to talk too much," she says. "This is your time."
The students turn their attention to their essays. Some of them move
their desks into loose clusters so they can consult with their peers as they
work. As with many of the classes at IB High, the ethos of the room is
simultaneously studious and relaxed; students stay focused on their
work but do so in a variety of ways: by listening to music on headphones
as they write, by "chatting" back and forth on Google documents, or by
bouncing ideas off their peers. Ms. Walsh moves easily around the room,
conferring in a low voice with individuals and clusters. Sometimes she
mainly listens and asks questions; other times she makes suggestions or
posits counter-claims in order to push her students' thinking. The room
fills with a productive hum.
In a corner near the windows, two students- Daniel and Nancy-pause
from their own work to help their friend Sydney as she puzzles through
her response to the second essay prompt: "Can a machine know?" Sydney,
a dark-haired white student wearing army pants and a long-sleeved cotton
shirt, says that in her mind she has substituted the word "computer" for
the word "machine" because it helps her to make the question more con-
crete. Yet although she spent time at home before class brainstorming,
she is still having trouble articulating her thesis statement. As the three
of them talk things through, Ms. Walsh joins them to listen and help.
DANIEL: "Can a computer know? I mean, I guess computers do memory
• very, very well, but humans can only remember a very small sequence of
numbers. But I'm like 100 percent certain that they can't feel like we do.
I guess that they can remember keystrokes, though? Does that count as
memory?"
IN
PI
pr
M
er
SY
N/
SY
SY
m.
pu
M:
to
pa
sta
nit
sul
WC
ab:
Ovi
Al
enj
me
bre
stu
the
]
of i
in :
prc
pri
COIINTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
I 59
SYDNEY (PAUSES BEFORE SHE RESPONDS): "I guess. But if you have a com-
puter, it doesn't remember it was dropped-it only has memories that we
programmed into it."
MS. WALSH: "Hmmm. But with artificial intelligence, it learns from its ex-
periences." She looks at Sydney with an expression that hovers between
encouragement and challenge.
SYDNEY: "But computers don't have experiences, not like we do."
NANCY: "So what are you arguing?"
SYDNEY: "I guess that it depends..."
MS. WALSH: "How does it depend?"
SYDNEY: "It depends because human beings are conscious thinkers, and
machines are not. We can make sense of what we're experiencing, we can
put two ideas together-machines can't do that."
Ms. Walsh breaks into a wide smile. "Ding ding ding! Now you're starting
to get somewhere. Now stop talking and try to get your ideas on
paper."
Sydney returns the smile but continues to look slightly anxious. As she
starts to type, she says,
"This class makes my brain hurt."
Brief as it is, this conversation epitomizes the quality of deep cog-
nitive engagement that Ms. Walsh's Theory of Knowledge course
supports students in developing. Invited for the first time into the
world of epistemology, students grapple with content that is deliberately
abstract, in order to consider a range of issues that relate to the course's
overarching essential question: "How do we know what we know?"
Along the way, they learn to think across disciplinary boundaries, to
engage with and critique each other's logic, and to construct multidi-
mensional arguments. Ms. Walsh serves as a guide in the process,
breaking down complex concepts into component parts, encouraging
students to steer into perplexity, and, as she does with Sydney, modeling
the kinds of "thinking moves" that enable rich discussion.
Intriguingly, the work that these students are doing is a requirement
of the International Baccalaureate program, which we were interested
in as having potentially created a system for deeper learning. The IB
program, founded in 1968, was created by a group of Swiss-based
private school educators with a particular goal in mind: to design a
comprehensive set of assessments that would allow globally mobileIб0
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
students to certify their readiness to attend top-tier universities.' IB
unapologetically asks students to do "deep" thinking- to ponder ques-
tions of epistemology, write extended historical essays, and grapple with
complex questions in math and science— and so has set itself apart from
the low-level state multiple-choice tests that are so common in Amer-
ican education. While for much of the program's history the Interna-
tional Baccalaureate Diploma Program (IBDP) was an unequivocally
privileged one for global elites, in recent decades a growing group of
American educators has begun to experiment with broadening the
program to provide more equitable access to deeper learning. Lynn
Walsh's school, which we call IB High, is part of this movement: it
embraces an "IB for All" mission for its untracked, socioeconomically
diverse group of learners.
For all of these reasons, we wanted to investigate Iß as a potential
system for deeper learning. As we visited a half-dozen IB schools--all
of which were non-elite public schools-we came to think of IB as a
very useful resource for promoting deeper learning, but one that needs
to be paired with a set of school-level mechanisms to achieve its promise
consistently across classrooms. For reasons we will discuss later, in many
of these IB schools we saw practices similar to those we had seen in
other schools, namely much teaching from the textbook and few op-
portunities for students to engage in complex sense-making. In con-
trast, the school we call IB High had found a way to build upon the IB
framework to create classrooms that were frequently challenging
and rigorous, where student thinking and questioning were the sine
qua non of daily instruction. This motivated us to take a deep dive at
IB High to understand exactly how they had managed to build on
this external framework to create a powerful intellectual community
within their school. In particular, we asked: How does the IBDP
framework function and what are its beliefs about deep learning?
What internal qualities do schools need to cultivate in order to make
good on IB's potential? What are the promises and challenges of
offering IB courses to a wider range of learners than historically have
had access to them? And, finally, what does the IBDP tell us about the
possibility of erecting an external system to support deeper learning
at scale?NG
[B
iS-
th
m
Г-
1-
ly
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
ІбІ
History and Goals
In their book about the history of the International Baccalaureate
Organization (IBO), Jay Mathews and Ian Hill refer to the IB as a "su-
pertest." Given that the IBO has developed curricular programs for the
"primary years" (ages three to twelve) and "middle years" (ages eleven
to sixteen) that do not center on external assessments, the term is in
some ways a misnomer. Yet the International Baccalaureate Diploma
Program (IBDP), offered to students in their final two years of sec-
ondary school, is the original and most fully specified of the IBO's
programs, and is, in fact, a kind of test.
To be specific, the IBDP comprises an extensive set of academic
and extracurricular performance tasks on which students must dem-
onstrate mastery in order to gain enough points to earn the presti-
gious IB diploma. These tasks include both more and less conventional
forms of assessment. Like the more widely known Advanced Place-
ment program, each subject taken concludes with a criterion-referenced
written exam. But in contrast to AP, which began as an effort to give
high school students the content of college-freshman survey courses,
and thus has traditionally emphasized breadth over depth, IB exams
do not use multiple-choice questions and instead ask students to
engage in open-ended analytic tasks? For the literature exam, for
example, students are required to craft several essays- one in which
they read, and write an analytical essay about, a previously unseen text,
and one in which they draw on works they have studied in order
to respond to genre-specific questions such as: "Considering two or
three plays you have studied, compare the impact on meaning of
some arrivals and departures from the stage." For the math exam,
students complete a series of free-response problems, showing their
thinking and calculations as they go. For the music exam, students
listen to an unidentified piece of music and then write an essay in
which they develop an evidence-based hypothesis about its historical,
geographic, and stylistic characteristics. Once students have com-
pleted these exams, they are mailed out to highly trained "IB exam-
iners" all over the world, who score and comment on them according
to exam-specific rubrics that use a common scoring scale from one to
seven.I02
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
The marks that students earn on these tests, however, count as only
a portion of the overall credits that students can earn over the course
of each subject's two-year arc. In each subject, students also engage in
a series of "internal assessments" (IAs) designed to support and capture
their learning across a range of modalities. In IB Literature, for ex-
ample, students must complete an audio-recorded "interactive oral"
exam in which they respond extemporaneously to analytic questions
about a course text; they also must lead a class discussion, produce mul-
tiple drafts of both analytic and persuasive essays, and craft original
pieces of creative writing that demonstrate their understanding of
certain genres. In IB Math Studies-the IBDP's non-calculus math
option-students must craft a mathematical question related to their
interests, collect and analyze relevant quantitative data, and write up
their results in the form of a formal research paper. In IB Music, stu-
dents participate in solo and group performances as well as produce
original compositions that demonstrate their understanding of music
theory. Teachers grade these IAs internally using IBO-provided rubrics,
but they also send the IBO a random subset of provisionally graded
work for each task. If there are consistent differences between internal
and external evaluations, the teachers are required to adjust their
grading schemes accordingly. Thus, the assessments that constitute the
backbone of the IBDP are externally guided, internally executed, and then
externally moderated— features that distinguish the program from those
that rely on highly scripted curricula, as well as from those that revolve
entirely around summative end-of-course tests.
In all of these respects, the approach of IB is consistent with one vi-
Usion of deeper learning, which we might call disciplinary authenticity?
The requirements of the program ask students not only to learn content,
but also to develop enough facility with the tools of the discipline to
produce work similar to that of scholars in the field. In contrast to the
traditional pattern in American secondary education, wherein students
are primarily asked to assimilate content, the IB consistently requires
students to discover knowledge, produce original work, and reflect on
the processes critical to doing the work of the disciplines. This vision is
more classically academic than that of Dewey High; there is less em-
phasis on projects and forays into the community, and more on con-
nection to universities and the kind of work that scholars do. This is
not a coincidence-in a program designed to prepare youth from
INT
aro
list
tho
tod
ints
sup
apF
me:
mo
ten
leve
the
reg
intr
do
emi
equ
the
the
rob
cou
ana
eac
cou
mel
hist
abo
A
tior
all
cap
stat
mir
gua
wor
to bINTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
I63
around the world for admission to elite colleges, the IB's designers en-
listed a number of elite university scholars from around the world as
thought partners, and university faculty continue to play important roles
today as content consultants and senior examiners. Thus the IB quite
intentionally breaks down secondary-to-postsecondary boundaries,
supporting a vision of deeper learning that is aligned with university
approaches to the concept.
The IBDP also encourages depth through its structural require-
ments. In order to earn the diploma, students take at least three but no
more than four "high level" courses, which involve more extensive con-
tent and a greater number of instructional hours than their "standard
level" counterparts. This allows the program to chart a course between
the extremes of breadth and specialization: while the "at least three"
requirement encourages students to dive into some subjects more
intensively, the "no more than four" mandate tries to ensure that they
do not stretch themselves so thin that their focus suffers. To further
emphasize this goal of balance, the two types of courses are weighted
equally, each affording students a maximum total of seven points toward
the twenty-four-point minimum required to receive the diploma.
While many of these courses and exams are within the disciplines,
the IB program also seeks to create connections across them. The most
robust of these requirements is the two-year Theory of Knowledge
course, in which, as Ms. Walsh's class illustrates, students are asked to
analyze and compare the epistemological assumptions associated with
each discipline. Students draw on what they have learned in other
courses to consider questions such as, "How does making a valid argu-
ment in the physical sciences differ from making a valid argument in
history?" or "What do science, history, and art tell us, respectively,
about the limits of human empathy?"
Additionally, the IB Learner Profile-one of the program's founda-
tional documents-specifies a number of cross-cutting dispositions that
all components of the program reinforce. A one-pager intended to
capture the essence of the program's aspirations, the Learner Profile
states that "the aim of all IB programmes is to develop internationally
minded people who, recognizing their common humanity and shared
guardianship of the planet, help to create a better and more peaceful
world"; it then elaborates that participants in the program should strive
to be "inquirers," "thinkers," "communicators," and "risk-takers" who are
Hic
àn
*IVe
ht
ia.I64
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
"knowledgeable," "principled," "open-minded," "caring," "balanced," and
"reflective." As we will discuss later, the extent to which this document
helps to create connections and coherencies across subjects is largely a
function of how individual schools execute the program. But it is clear
that one of the program's core aspirations is not only to develop disci-
plinary thinkers, but also to cultivate a range of humanistic dispositions
for the young people under its guidance.
Two other requirements seek to help realize the broader ambitions
of the program. First, students must produce an "extended essay": a self-
directed piece of research on a topic of their choosing, culminating in
a four-thousand-word paper. The topics that students choose are in
many cases interdisciplinary and / or related to interests that lie beyond
the content of their core academic courses: the promises and pitfalls of
artificial intelligence, the cultural function of spectator sports, the role
of community organizers in sparking social change, and so on. Second,
students must complete a 150-hour "creativity, action, and service"
project in which they undertake self-chosen extracurricular activities
(including sports, arts, and volunteer opportunities) and reflect on the
growth that these experiences support. The IBO provides extensive
guidance on what kinds of activities and reflections might fulfill this
component of the program's vision, but, unlike IAs, decisions about
credit are reached internally by each school's administration. Finally,
the arts--music, theater, and visual art— constitute one of the program's
six required subject groups; IBDP courses in these areas are weighted
equally to courses in disciplines such as math and science.
Stepping back, the design of the IBDP reflects a clear desire to chart
a middle ground between extremes—to balance breadth and depth of
study, to engage in disciplinary traditions while also encouraging cross-
disciplinary comparisons, to honor the canon without overlooking
lesser-known work, to emphasize intellectual development without ne-
glecting social-emotional and physical development, and, throughout,
to allow for school- and teacher-specific adaptations while maintaining
rigorous external standards. IB scholar Jerusha Conner argues that it
is this balanced and amalgamated quality that accounts for the spread
of the program among U.S. high schools:
It is perhaps because the IB represents a compromise between the
traditionally polarized camps of the standards-based reformers andEARNING
id," and
cument
rgely a
is clear
• disci-
sitions
sitions
a self-
ing in
are in
yond
ills of
e role
cond,
vice"
rities
1 the
Isive
this
yout
ally,
im's
ited
lart
1 of
ISS-
ng
le-
ut,
ng
'it
ad
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
165
the progressive educators that it has attracted such widespread
attention in the United States; each group can find within it an
appealing feature or a philosophical premise. Not only does the
IB represent a deliberate synthesis of divergent [European] na-
tional educational traditions.... It also stands as an uninten-
tional and innovative amalgam of competing [American] educa-
tional traditions.4
Indeed, given the program's elite European origins, its rapid spread
within the U.S. public school system is fairly remarkable. As of 2015,
30 percent of the nearly three thousand secondary schools worldwide
that offer the IBDP were located in the United States, with most
of these being public schools. The initial surge of adoption occurred
in the 199os, but the past five years have seen a second wave of interest
in the program, grounded mainly in the desire to use it as a tool to ex-
pand access to rigorous learning experiences. In Chicago, for example,
promising findings linking local student participation in the IBDP to
perseverance in higher education contexts prompted Mayor Rahm
Emanuel to call for a strategic expansion of the program, with the goal
that all district high schools become fully accredited "wall to wall IB"
institutions.
Despite such developments, however, IBDP still represents a small
niche in the landscape of American high school curricular reform: only
2 percent of U.S. public schools offer the program, compared to the
almost 78 percent that offer AP classes? As a result, comparatively
few American educators or parents know much about the program.
Matthews and Hill argue that this unfamiliarity accounts for the lack
of more widespread adoption, especially in high-income communities
where parents tend to worry-albeit without grounds-that choosing
the IBDP over the more widely recognized AP program might hurt
their children's competitive advantage in college admission.& Others,
citing instances of suburban communities where parents have organized
to reject the program, credit a strain of "paleo-conservative sentiment"
that sees the IB's emphasis on multiculturalism and global peace as
"anti-Christian, un-American, and Marxist." Still others point to
the program's comparatively resource- and time-intensive nature; in
contrast to AP, which can be implemented in a modular way and im-
poses fairly minimal costs on schools, the process of gaining full IB166
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
accreditation takes three years, expensive IBO-provided training for
all participating teachers, and significant documentation, as well as an
annual fee of Sil,ooo to support the process of external moderation.
We would add a fourth interpretation to the mix: while the IBDP may
indeed resonate with a number of difterent American educational phi-
losophies, its deeply intellectual nature runs counter to certain main-
stream American values and traditions.
As comparatively small a niche as the IBDP represents, however, we
believe that it is worth taking seriously as a framework that can sup-
port high schools in organizing to provide deep learning consistently
across classrooms. Like all externally developed programs, however, the
vision, guidance, and materials that the IBDP provides are no guarantee
that consistently deep learning will occur.l We need, then, to under-
stand what kinds of school-level characteristics and practices are needed
to maximize the program's potential.
A Closer Look at IB High
We chose IB High for in-depth investigation because it stood out among
the non-elite IB schools we visited as a place where instruction was con-
sistently achieving the aspirations of the IB program. Across ninety
hours of classroom observation at the two campuses, we found that
three-quarters of the classes featured tasks that asked students to
think, inquire, and develop ideas, while only one-quarter were more
conventional teacher-directed classes.
Demographically, IB High falls solidly in the middle of the socio-
economic spectrum. Founded in 1998, the school serves a total of eight
hundred students across two campuses ("North" and "South"), both of
which are located in a former shipping town about eighty miles from a
major East Coast city. Reflecting the working-class and middle-class
population of the surrounding region, go percent of the school's stu-
dents identify as white, 7 percent qualify for free or reduced lunch, and
only a handful are English language learners. These official classifica-
tions mask a great deal of variation with respect to motivation, skill
level, academic background, and class. Like other public charter high
schools in the state, students gain admission by entering a randomized
lottery prior to their ninth-grade year—and their reasons for doing so
INTE
are
kid:
bec
her
the
pre
cha
vio
SCT.
SOC
lexi
rev
the
as 1
opi
has
by
tin
pir
all
gre
an
rat
off
an
frc
CO:
scl
WE
su
let
sti
Sh
ah
ag
beNING
§ for
1S an
tion.
may
phi-
ain-
, we
ler-
led
ng
п-
ty
at
to
Te
I-
It.
if
S
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
I67
are highly varied. As one longtime teacher reports: "Some of our
kids are the academic crème de la crème, and some of them are here
because they were bullied because they're lesbian or gay, some are
here because the school has a good reputation and mom and dad wanted
them here….. and then some are kids who failed at everything at their
previous junior high schools." IB High's students affirm this range of
characterizations. Many talk about being "C" students in their pre-
vious schools; others, especially those who identify as being among the
16 percent of the school's population with diagnosed special needs, de-
scribe coming from places where they felt both academically and
socially marginalized. "At my old school, they 'accommodated' my dys-
lexia by putting me into the lowest classes possible," one such student
reveals. While some of the students are from professional-class families,
the school also has a large population of working-class students, as well
as many students who are dealing with the ravages of alcoholism and the
opioid crisis. Statistics show that the region where the school is located
has the highest death rate in the state due to opioids.
It is this backdrop, as well as the IB's history as a program designed
by and for the intellectual elite, that make IB High's approach so dis-
tinctive. Since receiving its IB accreditation in 2004, the school has
proudly defined itself as an "IB for all" institution, which means that
all students take a full roster of pre-IB courses in their ninth- and tenth-
grade years and an equally full roster of IBDP courses in their junior
and senior years. While students can choose to sit for selected IB exams
rather than to pursue the full IB diploma, there are no non-IB courses
offered; everyone completes the full curriculum in order to graduate,
and almost all students who enter the school ultimately do graduate
from it. This ambitious approach has yielded impressive results that
corroborate our observations. In Newsweek's 2015 ranking of U.S. high
schools, IB High ranked among the top ten charters in the country as
well as among the top fifty U.S. high schools overall. The school's re-
sults on the 20r5 PISA test confirm that its students achieve at high
levels compared to both domestic and international peers. If IB High's
students were a country, they would score second in the world, behind
Shanghai, in reading and science, and fifth in the world in math, slightly
ahead of South Korea." IB High also scores well above domestic aver-
ages on such items as "most of my teachers are interested in my well-
being" (90 percent of IB High students agree) and "most of my teachersI68
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
really listen to what I have to say" (95 percent of IB High students
agree). 12 In terms of achievement on the IB, all students take at least
three exams and almost 80 percent pursue the full diploma, with
43 percent of the overall school population attaining it and virtu-
ally every student in the school earning at least one course-specific
certificate.
As a charter school, IB High has certain advantages over traditional
public schools. Like Dewey High and No Excuses High, it is consider-
ably smaller than most comprehensive high schools, with four hundred
students on each of its campuses. Students (or their parents) have chosen
to attend the school, and teachers have chosen to teach there. These
factors enable it to create a more unified mission than is often possible
in traditional public schools. It also has more flexibility than do district
schools over how to use its resources, and, as we will see, it has made
some different decisions about how to use them. At the same time, in
our travels we saw many charters that had the same struggles as tradi-
tional public schools, which is consistent with national evidence that
shows that charters, on average, are no better than regular public
schools. Thus a key part of the question is what IB High is doing with
these flexibilities that enables it to achieve what it does.
At IB High, we observed ninety hours of classes, which enabled us
to see the large majority of classes across the two campuses at least once.
We interviewed forty teachers, administrators, and students. We were
particularly interested in the consistency of inquiry-oriented instruc-
tion across classrooms, so we shaped our investigation to understand
how this came to be. We gave particular credence to instances where
different actors gave similar accounts or where our observations con-
firmed interview data. As we describe later, we also investigated a strug-
gling IB school; understanding this "negative case" helped us to see
what was distinctive about IB High.
IB High: External Guidance, Internal Coherence
"What does explaining your thinking look like and sound like when you're
translating something? And what's the benefit of explaining your
thinking process in Latin class anyway?" asks Mr. Lowe, looking quizzi-
cally around the classroom. He pauses for a moment to let his questionsINTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
register. With his boyish face and eager smile he could almost be mis-
taken for a high schooler himself, but his twenty pre-IB Latin students-
tenth graders at IB High North-listen attentively. "I want us to talk
about those questions because I realized that you spend a lot of time up
at the board going over translations you've done, but we haven't been
very explicit about what we want that process to look like or why we do
it in the first place," Mr. Lowe adds. He prompts the students to prepare
for a class discussion on these topics by talking about them in groups
for a few minutes.
The room erupts into conversation. It's halfway through last period on
the Thursday before winter break, but, as with Ms. Walsh's Theory of
Knowledge class, the ethos is clearly one of focused engagement. Walking
around, however, we see that the students are in different places in terms
of their ability to tackle the questions at hand. Some of them struggle to
offer thoughts that move beyond vague generalizations; others immedi-
ately jump into analytic conversations about why it might be useful to
think out loud for each other when translating. Mr. Lowe circulates from
group to group, listening in and pairing words of encouragement with
follow-up questions that seek to spur students to deepen their thinking.
When one girl asks whether her group has the "right answer" to the second
question, he smiles but doesn't respond directly. "There are a lot of ways
you could think about it," he says. "Keep talking-see if you can come up
with some other ideas."
After ten minutes, Mr. Lowe draws the class back together and asks
students to share ideas that have emerged. As the students speak, he
writes their thoughts on the board, using their exact words when pos-
sible and interrupting only occasionally to ask questions or to invite
those who haven't spoken to do so. The students, for their part, listen to
each other actively, some of them jotting down key points in their open
notebooks.
STUDENT 1: "So for the first question, you should be pointing to what you're
talking about in the translation with hand gestures."
STUDENT 2: "Yeah, like using your hand to guide people through physi-
cally. Like at the board you [looks at Mr. Lowe] make us point at the words
we're talking about, so people know what word we're on."
STUDENT 3: "It helps people with sequence."
MR. LOWE: "Can you say more about what you mean by that?"
ro
int
ligh
and
ver-
at inI70
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
STUDENT 3: "Um... [pause]... like it helps you communicate your
grammar, like the grammar that goes with each word and the correct
order."
STUDENT 5: "It looks like you're teaching the class. You're... explaining
what's going on and that's what teachers do. Like in a translation-let's
say a paragraph-you have to go up and teach the class what's going on
through your head."
STUDENT 6: "It's one thing to point to each thing and explain what it is,
but you have to explain how you know. Like, you have to touch on all of
your prior knowledge-this is what it is and this is how I know. You have to
explain what you're thinking as you're talking."
STUDENT 7: "Yeah, and to add to what [student 6] said, we have to explain
how we could have otherwise translated it, and why it doesn't work to do
it that way."
MR. LOWE: "I can hear some of you connecting number one to number
two-why is sharing your thinking useful in the first place? Who else has
thoughts on that?"
STUDENT 8: "I guess you can improve your way of thinking from other
people."
STUDENT 9: "Yeah, like if you don't know the concept very well and you
have it incorrectly, the teacher can clarify it because then the teacher
can know what you don't understand."
MR. LOWE: "Is the teacher the only person who can know that?»
STUDENT 9: "Maybe yourself?"
STÜDENT 10: "Or each other-if we're explaining our thinking we can help
each other when we get confused or if we get it wrong."
STUDENT 5: "You can almost gain a different perspective by explaining
your process. That can kind of cause a good discussion, and you can gain
a lot of knowledge from that."
STUDENT 11: "When you learn how someone thinks, arguably that's a way
to get to know someone."
MR. LOWE: "So there's a social component to sharing our thinking-l've
never thought about that before! I'm going to keep thinking about that.
That's really interesting."
As the conversation continues, Mr. Lowe invites those who haven't
participated to help synthesize what others have said. In the last few
minutes of the period, he asks students to silently journal about how
t
1
I
F
a
T
t
I.
f
t
a
I
a
tr
t:
aRNING
your
›rrect
aining
-let's
1g on
it is,
all of
ve to
plain
io do
nber
: has
ther
you
cher
lelp
ing
ain
vay
've
at.
i't
>W
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
I7T
their thinking has changed or deepened based on this conversation-and
he invites them to address a third question: "How is sharing your thinking
with others useful more generally?" He tells the students that they will
return to this topic at the start of tomorrow's class before diving back
into the work of translation with a renewed sense of purpose and a more
specific sense of process. "I look forward to reading what you've written,"
he tells the students. "You shared a lot of interesting ideas today-you
really got me thinking!"
The IBDP as a Scaffold and Anchor
Like epistemology, Latin makes for a pretty heady subject-and
perhaps not one immediately fascinating to twenty-first-century teen-
agers. This class session, however, exemplifies how Mr. Lowe, like Ms.
Walsh, manages to invite students into the content at hand in ways
that produce layers of cognitive engagement. To start, he frames the
day's task as one rooted in a question that students themselves likely
have about the course. Then, as the task unfolds, he makes a number of
moves that position his students as the key sense-makers in the room:
giving them time to consider the questions at hand before launching a
formal discussion; making their thinking visible by writing notes on
the board; and encouraging them to respond to and build on each
other's ideas rather than to seek his affirmation. His gentle refusal to
accept single answers to his prompts helps to ensure that the discus-
sion deepens as it progresses, generating intellectual rigor. Finally, his
stance communicates genuine interest in what his students have to say.
In aggregate, these practices form a foundation for the kind of student-
centered, constructivist "deeper teaching" that Magdalene Lampert
and others have described 13
How did Mr. Lowe learn to teach like this, and how much of his
learning can be traced back to the IB? As a recent college graduate who
joined IB High's faculty two years ago after spending the first few years
of his career in a nearby district school, Mr. Lowe is among the school's
novice teachers. In conversations, he emphasizes that he still has a lot
to learn about both the particulars of the IBDP and instructional prac-
tice more generally. The deeply intellectual and skills-focused nature
of his course, however, is no accident. Using the IB Latin assessments
and the IB Learner Profile as a compass for his work, he organizes hisx72
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
curriculum so that everything connects back to essential questions
related to the study and translation of classical languages: To what
extent can we connect with the words of someone who lived two thou-
sand years ago? What is lost when we try to translate texts across
language, time, and space? Can we ever truly understand what
somebody else means to convey? As a result, his course is an inten-
tional mix of vocabulary and grammar acquisition on the one hand
and rich conversations about philosophical and epistemological
"Theory-of-Knowledge-type questions" on the other. Along the way,
he tries to support students in becoming more aware of the "hows"
and "whys" associated with what they are doing— key metacognitive
understandings.
Mr. Lowe openly credits the IBDP as one of the key sources of guid-
ance for his curricular choices. With unqualified enthusiasm, he de-
scribes how the IB Latin assessments have helped him to determine the
skills, understandings, and dispositions around which to organize his
ninth-grade course:
Yeah, the IB Latin test is a test, but getting kids to the point
where they're prepared for it is the best way that I can imagine to
teach Latin. It says right in the IB curriculum guide that the goal
is not just about learning content, but learning skills that are
going to be cross-class skills, thinking skills.... so with transla-
tion, it's not just about what the Latin says, but it's really about
what it means.... Students are treated as the stewards of the lan-
guage because they'll encounter a word that can mean four quite
different things, and then the question is: how do you make that
decision?
Mr. Lowe's endorsement of the IB framework is echoed by a majority
of IB High's teachers, who similarly view the structure, content, and
values of the IBDP as useful anchors for their work. Even those who
are much further along in their careers seem enthusiastic about the pro-
gram, spending much more time describing the ways that the IB has
pushed them to expand their practice than dwelling on the ways that it
constrains them. For example, Ms. Walsh spent a long time explaining
how recent shifts in the Theory of Knowledge curriculum and assess-
ment have pushed her to expand her own practice:G
S
t
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
I73
The course is set up with ways of knowing and areas of knowledge.
[The previous version of the IB curriculum] used to treat them as
independent units. Now, the push of the course is really to just in-
troduce the ways of knowing, and then to integrate them. ...
also, they added all of these fun ways of knowing that you could
teach. They used to be language, emotion, reason, and sense per-
ception; they added memory and intuition and imagination and
faith. I was like, "Wow, these are all ones that I've always wanted
to talk about," so I did all of the new ones.
can
One way to understand these positive experiences is to recognize that
Iza dan
the assessment tasks that lie at the core of the IBDP specify a granular
12. *
vision of deeper learning outcomes- that is, they paint a detailed picture
of the kinds of knowledge, skills, and dispositions that are worth de-
veloping and the kinds of subject-specific activities that can support,
their development, as well as provide rich models of what proficiency
looks and sounds like. In so doing, the IB is solving a problem that we
witnessed time and time again in non-IB schools-much talk about
"deeper learning" and "twenty-first-century skills,' but no clear picture
of what such concepts mean in terms of actual classroem instruction
or student outcomes. We therefore describe IB as an "anchor" and a
"scaffold" that guides the work of its teachers.
The scaffolding function of the IBDP holds true at the school level
as well. Essentially, IB frees up the organizational equivalent of cog
nitive space, allowing stakeholders to work on implementation (the
"how") rather than to spend all of their energy trying to specify and
agree on the logic (the "why") and content (the "what") of their goals.
Mr. Stone, the principal of IB High North, draws on a recent experi-
ence of observing classrooms-including Mr. Lowe's tenth-grade
Latin classroom-to affirm this point:
I was in IB Math Studies yesterday. I can see a connection between
what is being taught there... and what is being taught in the soph-
omore Latin class I saw today: really both classes are explicitly
teaching metacognition. And it wasn't my or [the system leader's]
flavor of the month that now we're going to teach metacognition.
It's built in. Kids are going from classroom to classroom, asking:
How do I think about this? How do others think about this? Those
nt
he
ec-
k
ligh
ard
ver
ht inI74
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
habits are built into the curriculum. Without that, we'd have to
engineer it, and that means that you're not spending time actual-
izing it. 14
Similar sentiments are voiced by one of the school's English teachers,
who asserts that "it's still possible that deep learning is going to happen
without IB, but I think IB is a structure that has it built in, so it makes
it easier for the school and for the individual teacher alike."
Such observations resonate with a burgeoning literature that high-
lights the role of what David Cohen and his colleagues have called "in-
frastructure" in helping schools to achieve their goals! At the core of
this literature lies the argument that in order to create more consistently
desirable learning outcomes from classroom to classroom, schools need
to reach agreements about what kinds of problems teachers can reason-
ably tackle and what kinds of results should be expected; furthermore,
to support the enactment of these agreements, they must possess
materials and technology that guide the work as well as codified stan-
dards and norms that can inform judgments about quality. In this
light, the IBDP's power comes from the fact that it provides one ver-
sion of such infrastructure—a version that has at its heart an unusually
ambitious view of what students should know and be able to do by the
time they graduate, and thus can help to jumpstart efforts to pursue
deep learning of a certain type.
At the same time, our research at IB High suggests some of the limits
of implementing an external "infrastructure" when corresponding
school-level supports are not provided. Mr. Stone's comment that IB
High devotes its energy to "actualizing" the vision and values of the
IBDP makes a critically important point. No matter how well-specified
and/or compelling a set of instructional materials or design for
schooling might be, the burden still ultimately falls on leaders, teachers,)
and students to leverage it in consistently powerful and context-sensitive
ways. As we alluded to earlier, our experiences in other IB schools
illustrate this point. In all of these places, we encountered classrooms
that embody the program's signature features: disciplinary authenticity,
cross-disciplinary thinking, and an emphasis on applying knowledge in
service of producing original academic work. In none of them, however,
was there the same level of program-wide coherence and depth as at IB
High. In several of them, for example, the. Theory of KnowledgePNING
to
al-
sers,
pen
ikes
gh-
in-
i of
tly
ed
п-
'e,
SS
1-
9
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
175
course is treated as a survey of Western philosophy rather than as a plat-
form for making connections across disciplines; the Learner Profile,
for its part, functions less as a living document than as an unnoticed
poster on classroom walls. Moreover, across all of these schools, many
teachers continue to rely heavily on textbooks and lectures, despite the
emphasis of the IB assessments on active student engagement. As a re-
sult, students described their experiences of the IBDP in decidedly
more varied and ambivalent ways than did students we interviewed at
IB High. What, then, is IB High doing differently?
Feedback, Hiring, and Cultural Transmission
If one part of the puzzle is the anchoring and scaffolding function played
by IB, another critical part is the set of mechanisms the school has de-
veloped to support deeper teaching. Mr. Lowe describes his ongoing
feedback cycles with Mr. Stone, the campus principal, as critical to
his ongoing development. Such cycles, in which all IB High faculty
participate several times a year, have a three-part structure: a brief
pre-conversation where the teacher outlines a current problem-of
practice, a period-long observation, and a debriefing conversation in
which the teacher reflects and the participating administrator helps to
sharpen or deepen the teacher's thinking: In Mr. Lowe's case, he had *
been working on finding ways to draw out his students' thinking and (
to get them to engage deeply with each other's ideas-a goal aligned
with the Learner Profile's emphasis on developing "inquirers" who arr
"open-minded." Accordingly, this was the focus of his recent worke
with Mr. Stone. The big "aha" of the debrief, Mr. Lowe tells us, came
when Mr. Stone asked him to articulate what he wanted students to
learn from watching each other translate sentences at the board, which
in turn made him realize that he had never broached this topic explic-
itly. As a result of this conversation, Mr. Lowe designed a series of
lessons to get students to talk about the how and why of sharing their
thinking—lessons that he hoped would both make the norms for trans-
lation clearer and foreground students' thought processes. In so doing,
the feedback process moved instruction from what was already a student-
centered mode-having students learn from each other's work-to a
metacognitive level-asking students to reflect on the purpose of their
shared communication.I76
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
Mr. Lowe is what many administrators consider to be the human-
capital equivalent of gold: a highly reflective teacher with both the in-
clination and ability to adjust his practice in response to feedback, as
well as a willingness to set aside his own role as a "sage" in order to
focus on student learning. For a number of reasons, however, these
characteristics are not solely a function of Mr. Lowe's individual
strengths. That teachers like him end up at IB High reflects a highly
intentional hiring process. Overseen by the school's executive director,
Mr. Weber, this process is far less time-intensive than those at Dewey
High and No Excuses High; in fact, after the initial vetting process,
face-to-face time often includes only a single interview conducted via
Skype. Mr. Weber, however, is clear about the types of candidates he
seeks: candidates who model "passionate engagement" with their sub-
jects, who are "super reflective" about their practice, and who "don't use
'T' very often" when describing their classrooms. While the first quality
aligns with the IBDP vision of disciplinary authenticity, the second and
third qualities help to ensure that new teachers will be receptive to IB
High's emphasis on student-centered instruction. This emphasis is com-
municated not only through regular individual feedback sessions but
also through carefully structured peer observations, the placement of
newer teachers with same-subject mentors, and department meetings
that focus on the instructional implications of the IB Learner Profile.
New teachers with less experience are also assigned a lightened course
load in order to free up time for planning and coaching. Thus IB High,
like Dewey High, adopts a "buy it and build it" strategy with respect to
its teachers. 16
The "build it" dimensions of this strategy are particularly important
because one of the critical limitations of the IBDP is that it does not
in and of itself force a disruption of teacher-centered instructional
practices. Essentially, while the IBDP specifies in granular detail what
content and skills are worth learning and how learners should demon-
strate mastery, it does not specify with similar richness the kinds of
teaching practices will best support progress toward these out-
comes.! This omission, paired with the fact that-unlike project-
based learning-IB's vision represents a subtle rather than a radical
shift away from conventional thinking about the goals of high school
education, means that without robust school-level supports it is all
too easy for teachers to continue seeing themselves as content experts'G
INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
I77
whose role is to "profess" fixed bodies of knowledge to their students.
The history and reputation of the IB as a program aimed at preparing
students to thrive in elite universities, where skillful lecturing is cele-
brated, exacerbates the problem. As one seasoned IB teacher wryly
notes, some teachers who are new to the program see it as a mandate to
become more teacher-centered:
[A lot of teachers who are new to IB] are like, "Oh, now I'm what
I always wanted to be, ever since ... [local] State Teachers College:
I'm now a college teacher! And God help these little buggers because,
I'm gonna make it a college course!" So then they lecture and' do
all kinds of other things that are non-IB.
Of course, as noted earlier, the nature of the IB assessments does en-
courage deep study and a wide range of activity types—-but this alone
is not sufficient to support teachers in accomplishing the shifts in stance
and in practice that allow for a deep focus on student thinking and rea-
soning. Ms. Walsh, the Theory of Knowledge teacher, notes that this
limitation is particularly problematic when it comes to offering the pro-
gram to learners who may not be ready or able to learn mainly from
lectures and/ or to be fully self-directed in their work. "IB is really dif-
ficult to do well with all students without good teaching practice," she
says. The school's leaders echo this sentiment, noting that while the
school's robust model of professional learning and consistent emphasis
on student-centered instructional techniques have resulted over the
years in "a significant shift towards students at the center," IB High still
has a number of teachers who rely too much on techniques such as lec-
turing. Our ninety hours of classroom observations across the two cam-
puses confirm this reality; while many teachers display a deep commit-
ment to supporting student thinking and to assessing and responding to
their students' progress in dynamic ways, roughly a quarter remain
largely teacher-centered in their practices.
Sticking points notwithstanding, IB High's ability to focus so many
of its efforts around student-centered instruction reflects the school's
cultivation of deep institutional knowledge about the IBDP itself.
The program, after all, is far from self-explanatory; it encompasses
a highly particular set of expectations, assessments, and rubrics that
can take teachers many years to understand fully. (At one of the
The
jec
ike
igh
and
ver-
it inI78
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
recently accredited IBDP schools that we studied— a school with very
few teachers previously familiar with the program-we encountered
a number of teachers who described the subject-specific IA require-
ments by turns as "esoteric," "complicated," and "super-technical.")
Given this reality, having a core group of teachers who understand and
can communicate the ins and outs of the program as instantiated across
different subjects, and who know how to interpret the IB's numerous
assessment rubrics, spares the school substantial effort. Compared to
the other IBDP schools that we studied, IB High's core in this respect
is particularly robust: of the school's eighty-three-person teaching
staff, nearly a third have taught in other IB programs- many of them at
schools abroad-and seventeen are certified as IB examiners or assistant
examiners.
Mr. Weber serves as the guardian of this reality, filling some open
positions with new teachers who "have the right attitude and haven't
been spoiled by another system," but also aggressively recruiting mid-
career candidates from IB schools abroad. This all but guarantees that
newcomers to the school are able to hit the ground running with re-
spect to curriculum- and assessment-related support. The approach to
hiring also plays a critical role in establishing and maintaining the way
that IB High's teachers learn to think about the program's vision and
goals as an integrated whole. As one IB High veteran explains:
It's very, very difficult to get teachers' mindsets into what the IB is
really about unless they've had contact with other IB teachers.
Schools that are starting fresh have a very difficult time. When I
came here, [Mr. Weber] had seeded each department with at
least one person who had taught overseas in another IB program,
who understood the cultural milieu, who understood what IB
really means: that it's not AP, that it's not just a series of courses,
that it's a whole way of approaching kids. That's what's hard to
replicate— the culture-unless you know what it is you're trying
to get to.
Strikingly, this assertion echoes the emphasis of Dewey High's
founder on the importance of "knowing what gold looks like" with re-
spect to a school's aims. In both cases, apprenticeship and cultural
transmission-having people steeped in the model guiding newer
t
C
S
d
la
it
A