6
Deeper Learning at the Margins:
Why the Periphery Is More
Vital than the Core
IT'S A COOL, fall, Monday in New England, as I continue my visit to At-
tainment High. I have been attending classes throughout the day, and the
last one is a senior English class. It is about two weeks before the 2016
presidential election, and, as I walk in, the students are, with teacher en-
couragement, Googling on their phones which countries have the highest
voter turnout. Belgium, says one. I think it's Uzbekistan, says another.
Roughly the first seven minutes of class pass this way.
Then attention turns to me. I'm a visitor, and students are searching for
anything to take attention away from the proposed task of the day.
"Where are you from?" asks the teacher. I explain I'm from Harvard, which
prompts a number of questions about Harvard and the purposes of my
study. We talk for about five minutes, and then twelve minutes into the
period, the actual class begins.
This is a senior English class. The course, it turns out, is on hip hop, but
all seniors have to read Hamlet, so this is a class on hip hop where the task
for the day is Hamlet. The teacher, a white man in his late thirties, speaks
in a kind of street slang to a group of students, half of whom are white
and half of whom are black and Latinx. He starts by explaining that if
you are writing an analytical paper, you need quotations, textual quota-
tions, and explains the format for a text quotation. He tells them that
not all essays need to be five-paragraph essays; if you have more to say,
feel free to go longer. He tells them to put titles on their work. The
students are listless and seem bored.
252DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
253
Then they turn to Hamlet. "What is the difference between being a
coward and being cautious?" the teacher asks. "Whatcha got, Logan?
Whatcha got, Amanda?" he calls, trying to draw out some responses. After
a few perfunctory responses, he turns to Hamlet. Is Hamlet a coward? A
student responds, "He talks about doing all of these things but didn't
follow through on any of them." The teacher summarizes, "We've all been
there, talked crap and not backed it up." About five minutes for this
mini-discussion.
They turn to watching three different film versions of Hamlet. The stu-
dents are supposed to be looking at how different actors played Hamlet
and judge how believable he is as a "man of action." After twenty min-
utes of watching the film, a five-minute discussion ensues. Mel Gibson is
emotional; Kenneth Branagh more measured.
The teacher tells them that they haven't been up all day, so they should
walk around. They walk to the back of the room, look at some of the
posters on the wall, and sit back down.
The final task is to look at modern English versions of some of the
Shakespeare lines, and, in pairs, to try to figure out which scene in
the play it matches with. They do this, without much enthusiasm, for
about ten minutes, when the bell rings. Students hurriedly get up and
begin to file out. The teacher plays some hip hop as the exit music. As
they are leaving, he writes the scenes of Hamlet on the board that they
need to read for next time.
As class ends, one girl, Emily, approaches the teacher. She says that she
isn't going to be able to read Act IV of Hamlet for later this week; she is
the stage manager of a show, The Servant of Two Masters, which is going
up next week, and she has some late nights in front of her in the theater.
The teacher says, "Don't worry about it, you know what's important," as
she heads out.
About an hour later, l'm at theater rehearsal for the aforementioned
show. The energy is entirely different than the class I have just left.
Students bound in and begin chatting with their friends. The crew is
buzzing around the stage, putting some finishing touches on a railing
that has just been attached to the upper deck. Emily is reading through
the script and preparing for the day. Ben DiSalvo, the adult director of
the show, calls them to order and offers a brief agenda of the scenes
that they are going to be working on that day. Students quiet down and
listen attentively.254
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
The action begins with warmups-first physical, then mental. The ac-
tors form a circle. Today's physical warmup is going to be led by Matt,
one of the senior actors in the show. "All I want is a proper cup of coffee,"
he intones, and they repeat it back to him. "Made in a proper copper coffee
pot. I may be off my dot. But I want a cup of coffee. From a proper
coffee pot." As they work through this tongue twister, which they use at
the beginning of almost every rehearsal, the atmosphere is light. They re-
peat it, faster, with laughter when there are the inevitable slip-ups. From
there it is onto some stretching: rolling the shoulders, windmilling the arms.
Ben then moves to the mental warmup. I know, he says, as they close
their eyes, still spread around the stage, that you may have had stressful
days. But leave that behind. Forget that test, that problem set, the things
that are giving you stress, and let it go. Be here, be present. Get yourself
into your character. Begin to think about the world from the perspective
of your character. Feel the emotions of your character.
And then it is on to rehearsal. For two hours, they rehearse, stopping
for feedback and notes. Today is a full run. It is not necessarily their best
run, since they have recently dropped their scripts and thus the actors,
who are struggling to remember their lines, have lost some of the fluidity
of movement that characterized some of their earlier rehearsals. But as
they get further into the play, the energy is better, and by the end, they
are proud to have at least done a full run-through, which can serve as the
basis for the work tomorrow. Rehearsal ends, students reconnect with
each other, and they head slowly into the parking lot, some lingering a
bit to talk with Ben or debrief the day's rehearsal with a friend.
It may seem counterintuitive, but in many high schools there is more
deep learning happening in "peripheral" activities than in "core" disci-
plinary classes. We've already seen that elective classes often create
more powerful experiences for their students than core disciplinary
classes. Here we extend that argument to extracurricular activities such
as theater, music, debate, newspaper, athletics, dance, Model United
Nations, and many more, which students tell us have the depth, authen-
ticity, and creative ethos that their core disciplinary classes tend to
lack. These extracurricular spaces are not only more fun and engaging,
but also are actually more consistent with what we know makes for good
platforms for learning.NG
C-
it,
'e
t
DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
255
Although extracurricular settings vary widely in their particulars,
they share key features that provide a platform for depth. First, they
provide opportunities for students to connect their identities to real-
world domains of professional practice, to build knowledge and skills
over time, and to create authentic products and performances. Second,
learning in these settings happens through an apprenticeship model in
which real-world domains of professional practice provide standards for
good work, teachers model expertise and conviction, and students are
gradually inducted into more complex aspects of the field. Apprentice-
ship scenarios also have the advantage of exposing learners to what
scholar David Perkins calls the "whole game," inducting them as
junior members into a functioning and integrated domain.' Finally,
the element of choice empowers students both to explore new identities
• and to play to their strengths—a developmentally appropriate bal-
ance of risk and security. Taken as a whole, we argue, these qualities
explain why peripheral school settings are so often where the deepest
learning occurs.
Elevating the virtues of the periphery inverts some traditional as-
sumptions about how to view the American high school. Some have
argued that the development of extracurriculars and electives have di-
luted the proper academic mission of high schools. We argue here
something close to the inverse-that these peripheral spaces have
some distinctive advantages in fostering serious learning that could
make them a model for more traditionally academic spaces within the
school. In making this argument, we will tie in research on how out-
of-school settings can promote positive youth development, research
that emphasizes the importance of many of the same qualities we iden-
tify in electives and extracurriculars.
We did not plan to make this argument when we started the research
for this book. Our intent was to focus on core disciplinary classes. But
as we spent more time in schools, we were struck by the contrast be-
tween the student passivity, boredom, and apathy that was too often
found in teacher-controlled core classes and the energy, vitality, teacher
passion, and student leadership we saw in the elective and extracurric-
ular spaces.? Having repeatedly observed this pattern, we decided to
focus on one extracurricular activity in order to understand in more
detail how different features of these spaces can come together to create
powerful learning environments. Later we will consider how the key256
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
elements we identified in theater are also present in other extracurric-
ulars, and whether there are some broader lessons that might be carried
from the periphery to the core.
A Brief History of Extracurriculars and Electives
The growth of extracurriculars and electives is highly intertwined with
the expansion of the American high school. Until 1900, high schools
served only a small fraction of elite American students, and the cur-
riculum was largely classical subjects-Latin, Greek, ancient and for-
eign history, and philosophy. Over the next thirty years, the high school
crystallized into the form it has today— a mass institution serving the
vast majority of youth ages thirteen to eighteen. The main spur was
economic. As the economy shifted from an agrarian economy to an in-
dustrial one, and child labor was increasingly prohibited, more and
more youth were now expected to acquire a general education rather
than going directly into the labor force.
As the school expanded, it needed ways to engage the many charges
that were now under its roof. This led to a significant shift in the ac-
tivities of school, including changes made to the formal curriculum and
in the development of extracurricular activities. With respect to the
formal curriculum, more and more modern subjects were added. A de-
bate ensued about the nature of this changing curriculum. One faction,
led by Charles Eliot, Harvard president and chair of the renowned
Committee of Ten, argued that the curriculum should be expanded
to include more modern subjects-including French, physics, and
chemistry-but remain academic in its foundations, and that this cur-
riculum should serve all students. A second group, whose views were
influentially put forward in the Cardinal Principles document of 1918,
argued that schools needed to be more relevant to meet the interests of
their students, which would require a much wider array of subjects, in-
cluding bookkeeping, stenography, home economics, and others. While
the first group was successful in setting much of the formal curric-
ulum, particularly for higher-track students, the second was successful
in greatly expanding the range of subjects that could be studied in
school. A big part of how these changes were reconciled was through
the creation of different tracks-students in the academic track wouldDEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
257
study the curriculum prescribed by the Committee of Ten, those in
the commercial tracks would learn the skills for low-level white-collar
jobs, the vocational track would have more hands-on courses that
would prepare students for manufacturing, and the general track would
include a smattering of all three. The newly emerging science of intel-
ligence testing was used to buttress this system of tracking, because it
seemed to provide objective assessments of who belonged where.+
During this period the extracurricular panoply that we see today
was also developed. In the first wave were boys' sports, including base-
ball, football, and track and field, followed later by basketball and
soccer. Other early activities included debate, drama, yearbooks, and
newspapers. Between 1gIo and 1930, schools developed many other
activities, including student council, band, orchestra, and glee, as well
as a variety of clubs and hobbies, including some connected to disci-
plinary subjects.'
Critics raised two large objections to these shifts. The first was that
the promotion of these elective, practical, and extracurricular subjects
diluted the focus on academic subjects. The Lynds' classic 1929 book
Middletown portrayed both students and adults as more interested in
these various clubs than in actual academic work. The Lynds quoted
principals as complaining that "hardly a week passes that they do not
have to take time from class work in preparation for a contest, the spe-
cial concern of some organization." They quoted students as saying
they had figured out how to skate by in their classes doing minimal
work to free up time for more participation in these clubs and activi-
ties. The Lynds saw these early clubs, particularly the social clubs
(which even included chapters of sororities and fraternities), as having
"canons not dictated by academic standards of the world of teachers and
textbooks" and as being more about "getting on" socially rather than
"learning and the things of the mind."
James Coleman extended this critique in his 196i classic The Adoles-
cent Society. Coleman argued that the elongation of adolescence as a
separate period of life had given rise to an adolescent society that was
largely separate from either the world of adults or the stated purposes
of schooling. Status was allocated in this society not by one's ability
to do well in the formal curriculum of school, but rather by virtue of
one's performance in this extracurricular realm, with athletics being
the surest path to adolescent glory (especially for boys). Again, this/-,
13
258
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
treatment could be read to mean that schools were losing control of
their fundamental academic purposes, and that social and athletic con-
cerns were exerting disproportionate influence. More recent accounts,
such as The Shopping Mall High School, have taken a similar tack, arguing
that schools have succeeded institutionally by developing an array of
electives, tracks, and extracurricular offerings that meet the desires of
all of their highly varied students, but in so doing have forsaken their
responsibility to develop a coherent educational approach that will make
significant academic demands on all of their students. The second, and
related, objection offered by a number of scholars of the American high
school is that these developments have created and maintained a heavily
stratified system of schooling.! From the beginning and continuing to
the present day, more advantaged students have been slotted into the
academic track where they are exposed to core academic subjects, while
less advantaged students are put into commercial, vocational, and prac-
tical courses that direct them away from college and the middle-class
jobs that can follow from a college education.
This criticism was most pointed in reaction to figures, events, and
movements that sought to make education less academic and more prac-
tical. One familiar target is Stanley Hall, a romantic progressive whose
thinking was critical in the development of the Cardinal Principles.
Hall argued that schools should be less about training in esoteric sub-
jects and should be oriented to preparing the vast majority of students
for life rather than college! Another target was Life Adjustment Edu-
cation, a I94os movement that combined the idea that students valued
the immediate over the abstract with extremely bourgeois sensibilities
over what was worth learning, resulting in an education that taught girls
how to sew and go on dates and boys how to manage the family fi-
nances. Hall, the Cardinal Principles, and Life Adjustment Education
have been lumped together by critics who saw all of these efforts as both
dumbing down schooling and denying to less advantaged students the
kind of academic education that remained for the most advantaged stu-
dents.!3 From this vantage point, adding more "periphery" into the
"core" dumbed down education and reified stratification.
These are important critiques and not without merit. But they also
miss some inconvenient facts and conflate several distinct issues. One
inconvenient fact is that the most closely observed studies of classroom
life clearly show that there never was a golden age of academic educa-EARNING
itrol of
ic con-
counts,
rguing
ray of
ires of
1 their
make
1, and
high
avily
ng to
› the
vhile
rac-
class
and
*ac-
ose
les.
1b-
nts
.u-
ed
es
Is
i-
e
DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
259
tion, even for the most advantaged students. Joseph Mayer Rice's 1893
study of classrooms found that students were mostly simply reading
textbooks and reciting the material back to their teachers. There was
little evidence of independent thought, and few opportunities for stu-
dents to investigate questions, develop ideas, examine primary sources,
or any of the other hallmarks of what we would today consider a good
education. The accounts of the Lynds, Hollingshead's Elmstown, and
Coleman did not reveal any significant intellectual engagement, even
among the upper-track students; for all students, it seemed, the formal
part of schooling was largely something to be endured. As we reviewed
in more detail in Chapter I, careful classroom studies at different points
across American history again and again have documented much of
what we see today-largely lifeless teacher-centered classrooms, devoid
of intellectual vitality, that favor close-ended transmission of informa-
tion over more open-ended investigations. Thus while it is true that
students in the academic curriculum have been exposed to more sub-
stantial subjects than those in the general, commercial, and vocational
tracks, the ways in which those subjects have been taught have been
unlikely to incite their intellects or imagination. s
Conversely, there were glimmers from the start that some of the most
interesting action was in these extracurricular and elective spaces. In
the Lynds' account, students "hated Latin"; it was the clubs where stu-
dents expressed "keen interest," and the vocational courses were the
"darling of Middletown's eye."6 A 1915 article quoted a high school
principal arguing that the extracurricular activities "pulsate with life
and purpose" while the formal curriculum "owes its existence to a co-
ercive regime, loosely connected and highly artificial."7 Coleman's
account is perhaps the most intriguing. While he is remembered for de-
scribing the influence of athletics and the emergence of the self-enclosed
adolescent society, his remedy was not a return to some bygone age of
formal schooling, but rather an expansion of the interscholastic com-
petitions to include more academic arenas. The major advantage that
sports had over academics, Coleman argued, was that performance
in sports represented the school, whereas academics represented the
individual; thus students and parents idolized star athletes but envied
star students. If physics and chemistry became part of academic com-
petitions, it followed that they would both be more motivating to stu-
dents and become higher-status activities within adolescent society,18260
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
There is a way to reconcile these views, and it was provided, perhaps
not surprisingly, by John Dewey. As David Cohen has described it, the
distinctive contribution of Dewey was that he took Rousseau's roman-
ticism about what education could become outside of formal schooling,
and suggested that it could happen within the walls of a school.!' Dewey
also rejected what he saw as a series of false dichotomies: between the
practical and the academic, between school and society, between the in-
terests of the child and the centrality of the subject. Dewey argued
that all of these seeming gaps could be fused by skilled teachers: for
instance, understanding how a car works can and should be integrated
with understanding physics and chemistry. He also maintained that it
is worthwhile for all students—-no matter their eventual destinations—
to understand both the practical mechanics of the car and the under-
lying scientific disciplines. Dewey was horrified by both the stilted
teaching that to him produced superficial understanding in formal
schooling and the bastardization of his ideas by progressives who em-
phasized the practical to the neglect of the academic.
What Dewey foretold, but what is still frequently missed, is that the
standard account conflates two dimensions into one. It pits education
that is academic and rigorous against education that is relevant and not
rigorous. But whether education is academically focused has no relation
to whether it is rigorous: education can be academic but not rigorous,
and, critically, it can also be both relevant and rigorous. Table 6.I, which
we've labeled Dewey's Quadrant, shows the possibilities. Many inter-
preters of the American high school have focused on the contrast be-
tween the top right (academic and rigorous) and the bottom left (rele-
vant and not rigorous). The problem with this contrast is that it exists
more at the level of policy talk than practice-while Eliot and the Com-
mittee of Ten championed the kind of rigorous academic education
that they were seeking to provide at the university level, most studies
show that this was rarely achieved within American secondary educa-
tion. Rather, what was much more common was the top left, where
students were exposed to academic material, but, for a variety of reasons,
were exposed in ways that emphasized transmission of information over
substantive engagement with it. Also common is the bottom left, where
practical courses may have been more engaging to students, but did not
push those students to connect more deeply with a domain of study.
Social clubs, sororities, and fraternities also belong here.DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
26I
Table 6.I Dewey's Quadrant
Not rigorous
Academic
Relevant
Most American high schools,
academic track
Stanley Hall; Cardinal Principles
Most American high schools,
lower tracks
Social clubs, fraternities, purely
practical electives
Rigorous
Charles Eliot (rarely achieved
in practice)
John Dewey
Best of progressive educatiol
Many extracurriculars and
electives
Largely absent from this account is the possibility of the bottom right
quadrant, where learning is both rigorous and relevant. This is the kind
of education that Dewey championed and that has been exceedingly dif-
ficult to realize in regular public schools within the formal curriculum,
though skilled teachers can make it happen. There are also substantial
reasons to think that many extracurriculars and electives qualify as
examples of this approach
There are some limits to this heuristic. As we have noted, there are
many ways to make something "relevant" to students, and skilled
teachers find ways to interest their charges in traditional academic sub-
jects. But even then, they often do so by finding some broader hook or
narrative in which to enmesh their subjects, as when, for instance, a
biology teacher motivates the study of the cell as a way to understand
human disease. Thus, in the spirit of Dewey, we might say that the best
education is clearly in the right column, but collapses the distinctions
between the rows, moving seamlessly between theory and practice,
academic study and relevance to students.
A Fresh Look at Extracurriculars
What would happen if we took extracurriculars on their own terms,
rather than comparing them to their academic counterparts?
Studies have consistently found a positive association between par-
ticipation in a variety of extracurriculars and subsequent academic,
social, and psychological outcomes, including grades, test scores, mental
health, and civic engagement. 20 Participation in extracurriculars is also
associated with lower dropout rates, and is negatively related to drug262
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
use and other delinguency outcomes. The associations between partici-
pation and lower rates of problem behavior are particularly strong for
high-risk youth. While it is not entirely clear that these associations
are causal as opposed to being produced by self-selection, it is clear that
there is not a zero sum game in which participation in extracurriculars
crowds out the ability to perform well academically. Rather, partici-
pation in the extracurricular arena is positively correlated with good
grades and other indicators of school success.
There are also reasons to think that the internal states that are
aroused during extracurriculars and other activities organized outside
of school are more conducive to learning than what happens in tradi-
tional school. This question has been of particular interest to Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi, who developed the theory of "flow" to understand
the conditions that promote the kind of rapt attention and concentra-
tion that characterize work and play at its best. In an ingenious series
of studies, Csikszentmihalyi and his colleagues beeped students at dif-
ferent points during the day to gauge how they were feeling at that mo-
ment. They found that students consistently reported low levels of
intrinsic motivation and high levels of boredom while doing their
schoolwork. Lower levels of engagement were found when students
were listening to lectures, taking notes, or doing individual work; higher
levels of engagement were found in group work, labs, and talking indi-
vidually with the teacher. But, on average, the beeper studies confirmed
the broader trends of research on engagement, which is that students
are, more often than not, disengaged with school.23 In contrast, when
they beeped students during extracurricular or organized after-school
activities, they found that, on average, students showed higher levels of
intrinsic motivation; concentrated effort, and positive mood states than
during the rest of the day-including during leisure time (such as
hanging out with friends or watching TV), when students had high
levels of intrinsic motivation but low levels of concentration.24
Sociological research on out-of-school contexts also shows why they
can be such promising platforms for development and learning. 2s A
study by Milbrey McLaughlin of 120 youth-based organizations in
thirty-four cities found that these are places where youth feel known
and supported, where they have opportunities to take responsibility
and ownership over their learning, and where they create products
and engage in public performances that they see as meaningful. Stu-PNING
rtici-
g for
tions
that
ilars
tici-
ood
are
side
idi-
aly
ind
га-
jes
if-
0-
of
ir
ts
i-
d
'S
DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
263
dents in the study said that they were frequently treated as "problems"
in school and in the neighborhood but that these community-based
organizations took the time to get to know them and build on their
strengths. McLaughlin's work also stresses that the best of these
community-based organizations were "intentional learning environ-
ments" centered around some domain they were trying to teach, fea-
turing a progression of knowledge over time as well as formative feed-
back as students gradually improved as ballet dancers, basketball players,
or community-service organizers.26 Research by Sam Intrator and Don
Siegel, which considers a range of out-of-school programs, reaches sim-
ilar conclusions. 27
Robert Halpern's work builds toward a more theoretically informed
vision of why this approach can be particularly powerful. Halpern's
framework is grounded in notions of apprenticeship. He notes that there
is abundant evidence that human beings, starting with babies, learn by
imitation and watching the models of their elders. He synthesizes the
work of Dewey, Maria Montessori, and Lev Vygotsky to argue that
learning occurs when the head and the hands work together, that the
role of the teacher is to scaffold tasks just out of the reach of the learner,
and that learning is a fundamentally social act that happens within
communities of knowledgeable people. He points out that Dewey and
Montessori were bullish on learning but somewhat skeptical of tradi-
tional school, precisely because its grammar of learning created artifi-
cial barriers between theory and practice, head and hands, in school and
out. Paralleling Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger's work on legitimate
peripheral participation, he argues that people learn by becoming grad-
ually inducted into a community of people who know how to do a par-
ticular skill or discipline, and that they become increasingly central
members and engage with the field in deeper ways over time. Halpern
also argues that this form is particularly well suited to adolescents,
who are seeking to develop their own identities but are still seeking
some adult guidance. Giving them structured opportunities to work
with adults but also to take considerable responsibility and initiative for
their work meets them where they are developmentally. And, he ar-
gues, opportunities to work alongside adults are particularly important
for youth who have had hard upbringings, because they need oppor-
tunities to connect with well-meaning adults, to experience success,
and to achieve some public recognition 28204
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
Theater as a "Powerful Learning Ecology"
We chose theater as a domain to investigate in more depth. Theater
seemed a particularly intriguing arena because it is closely connected
to an academic domain (English language arts), but in most schools is
organized primarily as an extracurricular activity. Hence it seemed a
promising place to investigate how the "periphery" might approach
a similar subject as the "core."
Attainment High has a thriving theater program. The school, which
has more than two thousand students, puts on eleven shows a year, in-
cluding freshman cabaret, a large musical, several modest-sized non-
musical shows, and a playwrights' festival featuring student-authored
work. More than two hundred students participate in some aspect of
theater annually, including by attending classes or taking on jobs in
crew, costumes, lighting, music, acting, and student directing. Theater
is the largest activity at Attainment High other than athletics, with four
full-time employees (the director, a lighting designer, a costumes de-
signer, and a technical manager). The large size of the program is itself
evidence of the program's success in attracting students and securing
community support.
We focused our research on one show, The Servant of Two Masters,
which went up in the fall of 2016. We attended ten rehearsals and the
show itself, went to production meetings, spent time with actors and
directors while they were off stage, and followed along as students
worked on costumes, lighting, and running crew. We interviewed al-
most all of the actors in the show, as well as the director and assistant
director, stage manager, lighting designer, costume designer, and props
lead. We also interviewed all but one of the adults involved in the show.
While theater is not unfamiliar to us or our readers, we aimed to see
it with fresh eyes. We wanted to identify the key elements of it as a plat-
form for learning and to see how those features compare to typical
classroom experiences. We found that theater provides a strong
platform for learning by bringing together a powerfu' blend of pur-
pose, passion, and precision. Students described theater, as opposed to
school, as a place that they had chosen to be, one where there was a
clear public product that created purpose for their work; a place where
they could develop not only their minds but also their bodies and theirEPER LEARNING
oth. Theater
y connected
st schools is
it seemed a
it approach
2001, which
i a year, in-
sized non-
t-authored
• aspect of
on jobs in
3. Theater
with four
umes de-
m is itself
securing
Masters,
and the
tors and
tudents
wed al-
ssistant
d props
e show.
I to see
a plat-
ypical
trong
f pur-
sed to
was a
there
their
DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
205
emotions; a place where people assumed defined roles and became part
of a highly interdependent community; a place that offered an arc of
learning, beginning with creative exploration and ending with careful
refirement; a place that was part of a much larger enterprise (theater),
which they identified with and aspired to; and a place where they were
never bored but rather alternately terrified, exhilarated, and finally
proud of what they created.
Purpose
Perhaps the most striking contrast between theater rehearsals and reg-
ular classes at Attainment High was the sense of purpose that pervaded
rehearsals, in comparison to the apathy or dutiful compliance we saw
in many regular classes. Each day's rehearsal had a clearly described
arc to it: some initial time to mingle with fellow castmates, a physical
warmup, a mental warmup, and then rehearsal, with frequent stops for
feedback from the directors. The schedule of rehearsals was emailed out
by the stage manager at two-week intervals, so that only those who were
part of the rehearsed scenes needed to be present for a particular re-
hearsal. The result was a transparency of purpose that is rarely achieved
in regular classes; everyone knew who needed to be there, when, and
why. Rehearsals ran from 3:00 to 6:00 p.m. daily (later during tech week
and dress rehearsals).
With this purpose clearly in mind and the show date getting ever
nearer, the kind of behavioral monitoring that is so frequently a fea-
ture of regular classes was eliminated. At rehearsal, there were no hall
passes, and no one asked if they could use the bathroom, get a drink of
water, or have a bite of food. Students ate and drank when they weren't
on stage, went to the bathroom when they needed to, and checked their
phones or did their homework when they weren't called. In compar-
ison, when they were on stage, they were fully present, rehearsing scenes
and taking feedback, often for several hours on end.
The work of the set design crew and those working on the costumes,
props, and lights was even less closely structured. In addition to at-
tending the main work time after school, students showed up— at the
theater, in the several rooms that held props and materials, in the tech
crew workshop, and in the costume-making room—at all times of day,
during their free blocks or at lunch. All of these spaces were almost266
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
always unlocked. A student might spend a free block hanging a light,
sewing a piece of a costume, or painting one part of the set. Students
often came in pairs or would chat with one of the adults in the theater
program while they worked. And although there was an overall plan
for the coordination of these tasks, the day-to-day work often happened
with high degrees of independence.
Jean Lave, who has studied the work of Liberian tailors, describes
the overall trajectory of work as loose in the day-to-day, but tight
on the overall sequence of activities and final expectations of learning. 29
A similar pattern prevailed for the crew and designers, who were being
held to high final standards but were granted considerable day-to-day
autonomy. This pattern contrasted sharply with what we observed in
most traditional classrooms: there the daily work is closely monitored,
but the overall arc and purpose are fuzzy to the students. One of our
interviewees brought this point home to us: why, she asked, do I have a
schedule of what is going to happen in my rehearsals, but not in my
classes?
With the purpose established, the atmosphere was often quite playful.
Students and adults had less formal and often closer relationships than
was usually true between students and teachers. Cody Black, the chair
of the theater department, was "Black"; Ben DiSalvo was "DiSalvo.
Students made fun of Cody's (absence of) hair, Ben's always highly
posh attire, and Ross (the gruff but beloved crew director) for the way
that his bark was worse than his bite.3º In one rehearsal, the male and
female leads, Truffaldino and Smeraldina, were struggling in their ef-
forts to flirt with each other. My notes read, "She goes for a hug from
the side; it looks awkward. Talia, the student assistant director, walks
over to Ben, the adult director, faces him, takes his hands in her hands,
and says, 'Would it work to try it this way?'" While this kind of physical
contact would be unthinkable in class, in theater, a female student
taking a male teacher's hands in her hands is simply an accepted part of
the rehearsal process.
Similarly, for the adults in the theater program, the space afforded
opportunities for different kinds of relationships with students. Ben,
the director of the show, was a Spanish teacher by day. He describes
the differences between the two settings: "I feel like I know these [the-
ater] kids in a totally different way. In Spanish we keep it go percent in
the target language. Down here, we are in an environment where weNING
ght,
ents
ater
slan
ned
Jes
cht
29
ly
П
1,
DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
267
are talking about a character's emotions, we get real and personal.
They are also here of their own volition. And we have three hours in-
stead of forty-five minutes." Adults on the production side also spent
long periods of time working alongside the students— giving some in-
struction, but also just working in parallel as they built a platform or
sewed some fabric. Especially over multiple productions, over several
years, they got to know students in ways that would not have been
possible during the time crunch of regular school. The costume di-
rector, a warm middle-aged woman named Naomi, said that several of
her apprentices were like her own children.
Another feature of theater that differentiated it from most traditional
classroom experiences was its approach to time. In most traditional
classes, credit is still accrued from seat time- students need to spend
. a certain number of hours in class to receive a credit. The result is
that, from the students' perspective, time can pass very slowly in class,
and disengaged students have strong incentives to doze off or stir up
trouble. In contrast, in theater, time is, in one sense, very luxuriously
allotted (three hours a day) but in another it is a very scarce resource,
because it never feels like there is enough of it to get everything ready
before the show goes up. Students are also willing to put in extra time-
staying until 8:00 p.m. or later during tech week, and until ir:oo p.m.
for the three dress rehearsals before the show. The production team
worked in project rhythms that resembled what we saw at Dewey
High-less intensive work early in the process, and then an all-out ef-
fort, including some weekend days, as the show neared. In all of these
respects, time in the theater was less like factory-model schooling and
more like time in a modern workplace-alternating between work
and rest, with the project deadline hovering over everything.
Purpose can also create flow, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi's term for
what happens when people are totally immersed in an activity. As the
costume designer, Rosalind, describes the difference between theater
and class: "A lot of the time in class I'll be like, 'Okay, fifty-five min-
utes, I'm checking the clock every ten minutes. In costumes, I'll get
there at 3:00. It'll suddenly be six o'clock."
Education writer Parker Palmer argues that the best classrooms are
dominated neither by teachers nor students, but rather by a "Great
Thing," which is the subject that demands attention.3! The theater is like
that-the presence of the show and the expectations of the audience
V268
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
are always there just out of sight, organizing the use of space, time, and
attention. It puts the students and adults on the same side-when
working collectively toward a goal, time is the enemy (because it passes
too quickly), and any action that might potentially promote the goal is
entertained. And it eliminates the need for grades, and other forms of
management, because the production is what organizes the action.
Choice
A big part of what characterizes theater, other extracurriculars, and
electives is that students choose to attend. When we interviewed stu-
dents after the show, again and again they returned to the fact that it
differed from core classes in school because they had chosen to be there:
• I am always excited to go there, because I love doing it. And I
mean school, you have to do it. Whereas with theater, you can
choose to do it or not.
• I'm happier to be at rehearsal than at school, because it is, some-
thing I want to do, love to do, with people who want to do it.
Even Ben, the show's adult director, acknowledged that he was able
to bring more of his full self to directing than to Spanish class, because
of the shared choice people had made to be there:
I think it's easier to open yourself up when you feel like you're sur-
rounded by people who have the same level of motivation that you
do, or the same things at stake that you do. And in the theater,
everyone is kind of on the same page. And so, they're kind of
opening themselves up naturally as well. And in a Spanish class-
room, I feel like I've got kids who want to be a Spanish teacher,
kids who want to travel abroad, and kids who would rather be
in, you know, a dungeon.
Electing to take part in a show also created a heightened level of ac-
countability. Actors said that the combination of choosing to be in the
show, the interdependent nature of the work, and the public nature of
the final product meant that they felt more onus to be intellectually en-
gaged in rehearsal than in class. As Matt, a senior in the show, de-ARNING
e, and
-when
Jasses
coal is
ms of
1.
and
stu-
at it
ere:
ie
DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
260
scribes it, "I feel like there's definitely much more of an expectation for
effort in a rehearsal than in a class." Why is that? "Obviously, because
you chose to be in rehearsal, you didn't necessarily choose to be in a
class. On top of that, there were other people that auditioned for the
show that also wanted to be there that didn't end up getting to be there,
and because you were chosen... you need to be giving it your all ...
you need to prove them right." Another actor, June, put it this way:
"I feel like I need to be present more in rehearsal because it's not just
about me and my education. It's also just about the show and my team-
mates, whereas in class—-also in class, if you're kind of zoned out during
the class, you can always, you know, ask your friends or ask the teacher."
The actors also felt that there was something special about being part
of a community that had mutually chosen to participate in theater. Sev-
eral described fond memories of summer theater camps where they
had put on productions with other kids who shared a similar passion
for the stage. Mutual commitment legitimated forthright passion for
theater-here was a space where it was okay to be into Shakespeare, or
to talk about acting as a craft. Acting also entails vulnerability, which
was easier among people who were similarly committed to the same end
goal. Laura says that because everyone had chosen to be there, "you're
really free to be onstage"; Ben describes it as "easier to open yourself
up" among people with similar motivations. Here Sage explains the dif-
ference between theater camp and regular English class, beginning
with the fact that all seniors are required to study Hamlet:
All seniors have to do Hamlet. And I really enjoy Shakespeare, but
I don't always really enjoy it with that class, or at this school in gen-
eral just because a lot of the kids don't really want to be doing
it. ... That indifference sort of ends up rubbing off on everyone
else. And then, if you are really enthusiastic about it, you just feel
awkward, and weird.
She contrasts this to Shakespeare in summer camp:
And so, the thing about the Shakespeare is—I mean the first time
I started doing it actually (was] at this camp up in Vermont called
Get Thee to the Funnery, which Renee [another student in the show]
also has gone to. And it was a really phenomenal experience....Intellecter
Which adfilter can
at Care
Clorstoon..
270
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
с л.
We played improv games, and did acting exercises, and we'd per-
form an abridged version of a Shakespeare play every summer. And
that was really, really, really great.
Why was it great?
You were surrounded by people that were also enthusiastic about
the same thing that you were enthusiastic about.... So many of
the people have gone there that were in the years above me, I just
admire so much still. And we just read through, and for each scene.
And whenever anyone has a question— you stop, and you talk about
it. And it was fantastic, because I think the first time I went, the
summer before seventh grade, it was great, because suddenly you
notice of all of the inappropriate jokes, and all of the foul language,
and all of the really beautiful poetic language too. Because I was
one of the younger kids there at least my first years, I had older
teenagers to look up to, and people who ... a lot of them have
helped me out a lot.
How does that compare to reading Hamlet in school?
Oh gosh, people don't acknowledge the dick jokes, or if someone
does, no one laughs at it, because it's not funny, it's just, I "Oh, wow,
this is awkward, I don't really care about anyone in this class. So,
I'm not going to laugh at something that's funny, because I don't
want them to think that I'm a nerd," and stuff like that. And it's
also—I don't know, I feel a lot of the time, people are kind of scared
to say that they actually like Shakespeare at least at school, espe-
cially at this school.
Community
As Sage's account indicates, part of what made theater powerful for stu-
dents was not only choice but also community. Community was the
most frequently appearing code in our field notes, indicating that stu-
dents had talked about it more than any other element of theater. At
best, theater created a way for students to find friends with similar in-
terests and passions; at a minimum, it gave them a place to go and aDEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
27I
community that accepted them. We were surprised at the number of
students who simply appreciated that they didn't have to go home and
be by themselves after school and liked knowing that there was a place
they could go and hang. Much like former professional athletes who
say that the thing they miss most in retirement is the camaraderie of
the locker room, students reported that the best part of theater was the
chance to be with their friends.
Formal and informal mechanisms were used to support the creation
of a theater community. Formally, shows featured cast bonding, where
the cast would go to someone's house, hang out, eat pizza, or build a
fire pit. There is also a tradition of the cast playing laser tag against
the cast of another show. Students clearly valued these opportunities,
and spoke fondly of cast bonding. But perhaps the more powerful
mechanism fur forging community was just the nature of the daily work.
Spending three hours together every day to produce something that was
collectively made, where some time was scheduled for specific tasks but
there was also some free time, created a recipe for building such a com-
munity. Here Olive answers a question about the difference between
school and theater:
I think the sense of community is different. I think when you're
in a classroom, you might not know everyone's name, but when
you're in a show, you learn everyone's name. You have a relation-
ship with everyone... If I'm talking to you in the scene, I should
talk to you outside of this, because I kind of want to know who you
are as a person. Whereas in class, you raise your hand, and [some-
times] you work in groups, and it's "oh you sound interesting," but
then you're back in your rows, and you forget about it.
Theater also created a way for students to find a niche and define
their identities in a large high school. Students in the program described
themselves as "theater kids," which they saw as a recognized identity
within the high school ecosystem. Part of the power of theater was that
it was not only an activity but also an identity. Theater kids generally
hung out at the end of the school where the theater was, not only after
school, but also over lunch and during the day. Theater kids frequently
defined themselves in opposition to "sports kids," who hung out at the
other end of the school. In a signal of how prominent sports are in272
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
American society, several actors, when asked how they got into theater,
began with "well, I wasn't a sports kid" or "I cannot do any sports; I
cannot; I don't even know what a football is." More affirmatively, the
theater kids defined a collective identity around the arts, liberal political
and social values, inclusion of minorities and gay students, and love
of theater. Raven, one of two African American students in the show,
said that she had found a home among the theater kids in part because
of their racial awareness:
I mean I would come into the girls dressing room, and they would
be talking about "Oh, did you hear about what happened with
Trayvon Martin, or Tamir Rice," or—well, not exactly those, but
instances like those, and they were "Oh yes, it's awful,-and did
you hear about, you know, what's happening at the protest?" And
these were things that I wasn't even aware of at first. So, the fact
that kids with a different ethnic background that weren't pretty
much that weren't minorities, and they were diving more into it,
and being [more] open to these topics than I was, that was really
surprising. And that really made me happy, and hopeful.
Students who did not necessarily fit that well into other social groups
often found a home in the theater program. One lesbian actress de-
scribes the nature of the theater community:
Well, I definitely think that a lot of weirdos end up in theater.
And... in sixth, seventh, eighth grade, middle school years, it was,
"Oh, it's the theater kids it's— they're possibly gay, they're kind of
awkward, they're quiet, unless they're screaming about Stephen
Sondheim." I don't know. But now it's kind of, "Oh, it's the the-
ater kids. They have a pretty good control of speaking with people,
their words, their emotions, they know how to hold a crowd, and
they're pretty interesting people."
While "weirdos" seems unflattering to the many delightful people
we met in theater program, it does capture the way in which it priori-
tizes embracing non-conformists, including non-athletes.
It would be unrealistic to suggest that it was always roses and honey
in the theater program. Students said that other actors could be catty
DE
an
fri
ot
wi
fri
of
ati
ori
"K
trc
ho
we
nit
bac
thi
I t
it's
abc
tive
tha
"T:
hey
tru
the
but
key
apP
1mF
cess
han
the
bretING
"er,
5; I
he
sal
ve
W,
se
DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
273
and cliquey, and that, in particular, there were often tensions among
friends when they auditioned for the same parts and some got them and
others did not. Some said that there also were divisions between people
who were regulars in almost every show and those who were more peri-
pheral to the program. As with any enterprise involving teenagers,
friendship and community were the most powerful draws, but forces
of jealousy and exclusion could also rear their ugly heads.
On the whole, however, the balance was heavily tilted toward the cre-
ation of an open, inclusive, and warm community. While that com-
munity was built and sustained by everyone in the theater program, it
originated with the program's founder, Cody Black, who, Ben says, has
"kind of the magic touch." Cody was a Jewish kid who was born in De-
troit and grew up in Queens. Cody's parents were divorced, and his
home life was, in his own words, "dysfunctional." Theater and sports
were his respite, the places where he went to find the kind of commu-
nity that was missing at home. These were special places because
"you're working with people to achieve something. You know, I look
back, it gave me joy, and it made me feel good about myself. And I
think that was important, because I wasn't getting that at home. And
I think working with like-minded people for the most part, whether
it's a sports team, or a play production, and having teachers who cared
about that."
Cody was particularly shaped by a few teachers, who were distinc-
tive in that they really trusted their students. The critical symbolic act
that Cody remembers was when teachers would give students their keys:
"There's always that teacher that give you their keys. 'Hey, go get this,'
hey-and it's this ring of keys. And those keys meant to me they're
trusting me with this. They're giving me their keys for God's sake. So,
they're trusting me, and they're giving me ownership-not power,
but... they were giving me what they had ... I had to take care of those
keys, and treat them as if they were my own." Cody embraces this
approach in his attitude toward his own students: "So, I feel like it's
important to give these kids the key to the kingdom."
Cody gives the students the keys to the kingdom in the form of ac-
cess to his "office," a place unlike any other at the school. Theater kids
hang in this ten-feet-by-ten-feet space seemingly 24/7, sprawled across
the couch, sitting on the floor, doing homework, or just shooting the
breeze. Particularly at lunch or right before rehearsal, you'll find students274
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
strumming a guitar, eating, or lounging. Cody is sometimes there,
sometimes not. When he is there, he often sits toward the back working
on his computer, occasionally joining the conversation with a joke or a
gentle teasing comment, but mostly just letting the students be. Cody's
otfice is a judgment-free zone— you can unload about your day, com-
plain about homework or other teachers-no topic is off-limits, and
there is none of the self-censoring that students usually engage in
around adults. Students own the space, in a way that this school, which
has lots of hallways but few benches or other places to sit, permits
few opportunities for. Some of our best interview data came from
Black's office, because students seemed freer to say what they really
thought. One student said it had been "overrun by teenagers" and was
now "less like an office" and more like a "communal space." Another
said, "That's a place where you can go, and you can get like pretty
much anything off your chest. You can just get with friends, and talk
about some chick that was being really annoying today. So, to other
people, probably people who aren't in theater, it's like, 'Oh, it's an-
other group of kids, you know, just talking in some teacher's office,
but to us, it's like a secret club."
In addition to running the theater program and directing the mu-
sical each year, Cody also teaches a Theater I class. In the class, the
culminating assignment is for students to write a letter to a friend or
family member communicating something that they always wanted to
say but haven't been able to voice. Then they perform it for the class.
In these monologues, students have come out as gay, shared about
alcoholic mothers and abusive fathers, and described friendships and
relationships that have gone south. Cody describes what happens next:
"And the point is, is that they look at each other, 'Wow, we all have our
story, and we all have places we come from, or things that are going on
in our lives that we can relate to, or connect with. ... And then it's al-
ways the same thing in the end,
, 'Oh my god, you know, like we know
each other even better, you know, and then when they see each other
out in the hall, they understand they have this special connection."
Since many of the actors in the program have been through Cody's
class, they have had this experience together, which creates opportu-
nities for deeper relationships with one another. Says one actor in the
cast, "T've been in his theater arts class, and it was raw. I mean the
content we were learning in terms of like the monologues, and dis-
D
[t
h
t)
P
h
F
d
cr
=
E.
tr
1N
E,
all
CI
h
S
B
h
cl
CiDEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
275
covering characters, it was a really raw process. So, once you've gotten
[through] those monologues, you feel pretty comfortable with saying
anything."
While building a trusting community makes for better theater,
Cody's view is more that theater is a mechanism for building commu-
nity. Cody has a master's in educational counseling, and for his thesis
he developed an improv troupe that took on issues like homophobia and
date rape, and by dramatizing them, tried to help adolescents talk about
them. When we asked him what his primary goal is for the program-
people first? subject first? people through subject? —he responded,
"People, I think it's people... You know, I think it comes down to this
human experience that I think we all crave-humans-even animals,
we crave to be connected. I mean I'll be honest with you. When I meet
somebody, and they're a Jewish person from Queens, I feel connected.
Hey, where are you from? Did you go to Waldbaum's? And I think we
all feel that, in my mind, we want to be connected." Particularly when
working with young people, who are actively trying to develop their
identities, take risks, and figure out how to relate to one another, Cody.
sees theater, and the community that it builds, as integral to not only
developing students' acting skills but also helping them become more
confident and connected young adults.
Interdependent Roles
EMILY (THE STAGE MANAGER): If anyone is out or sick, it puts a damper on
the whole process. No matter who it is. You can function, but it's not going
to be the best, if someone is sick or not there.
INTERVIEWER: Interesting. Why is that?
EMILY: Because every part is crucial-every person is there for a reason,
and we don't have extra people just hanging around. If you look at a stage
crew or lights or stuff, everyone is always doing something, because they
have to. Because they have deadlines. And these deadlines aren't flexible.
So, it's integral that everyone is where they need to be, always...
BEN (THE DIRECTOR): In theater, it is a community because everyone
has a part to do. Whereas if Billy is asleep in the corner of my Spanish
class, it doesn't really affect my performance in the class. We're co-
constructing something together in theater, but in Spanish class [we're
not.276
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
One way in which the theater production differed from regular classes
was the presence of roles. While most classes have just two roles—
teacher and student-the production had as many roles as there were
people, thirty in all. These included all of the different acting roles in
the show, as well as the director, assistant director, lighting designer,
assistant lighting designer, dramaturgs, costume designer, assistant
costume designers, and many more. The production of the show was
highly interdependent-it required not only that each student fulfill
their own function, but also that these pieces come together in an in-
tegrated way. This was not always so easy, as we will see.
One significant advantage of these roles is that they created many op-
portunities for leadership. Unlike during classes, students were given
opportunities to direct their peers. Emily, the stage manager, compares
her roles in class and school:
Class to me is something you've done your whole life. It is kind of
childish. Rehearsals are "Okay, this is a job." As you're getting
older, this is what life is going to be like. I know a lot of friends
and acquaintances that ... [are] struggling with the whole "Oh
gosh, I'm going to be an adult. I'm going to be in charge of my-
self." And I've been in charge of twenty people for the past couple
of months. So, I'm not really too nervous about taking care of
myself.
Talia, the student assistant director, describes how she had to gradu-
ally become more comfortable assuming responsibility, "And for me,
when I was directing, I was not only learning the actual content of this
is what it is to be a director; I was also learning leadership. I felt kind of
weird directing, because I was [thinking], 'Wow, I think this person has
more experience than me,'
and it kind of psyched me out at first, but
then I realized, 'No, I'm the director, I'm in this leadership position, I
need to step up,' and I learned how to kind of get over myself, and be a
leader."
For all the advantages of these roles, they posed the same challenge
that exists in any midsized organization: if roles enable the differentia-
tion needed for specialization, how can these roles be integrated into
a coherent whole? As in many organizations, each of these depart-
ments came to see themselves as separate units; students spent the vastDEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
277
majority of their time with others in similar roles— the actors with other
actors; the crew with the crew; the costumes people with the costumes
people. These groups were often physically siloed so that each group
could do their work: the costumes people had a room in which the cos-
tumes were made; a woodshop-type space was where the crew con-
ducted much of its work; and the actors got the stage, except for days
when light or set needed it and they were moved to the band room.
While there was some movement across roles over time (that is, someone
might be an actor in one show and do costumes for the next), there also
were many people who stayed in their roles over years, which further
intensified the departmental structure. Consequently when all the
groups were together-such as in the tech run, students mostly hung
out with people in their departments during breaks.
Given these dynamics, a key challenge for the show was to build in-
tegration across the teams, so that along the way they could learn lessons
about teamwork, perspective-taking, and mutual respect. There were
some formal integrating mechanisms. One was a series of meetings
between Ben and Talia and costumes, set, and lighting at the begin-
ning of the process to develop an overall vision for the show. Another
was the Friday afternoon production meeting, run by Emily, in which
each of the departments would have roughly five minutes to report on
their progress and ask questions that required input from other depart-
ments. As I described one production meeting in my fieldnotes,
About twelve students are sitting around two rectangular tables that
have been pushed together. Naomi, Ross, Ben, and other adults are
standing around the outside. Emily is leading the meeting and moving
us down an agenda. Cody is typing, presumably about something
else. Everyone else is paying attention with their eyes. One other girl
is taking notes on a Mac. There are four water bottles. Max has a can
of Pringles in front of him. Virtually everyone is wearing jeans-
people look like they are at a meeting, waiting for their turns. Not
enthralled, but also not misbehaving- just looks like adult life.
One way to understand what was happening here is to compare the
hidden curriculum of classrooms to the hidden curriculum of theater.
As Talia described the hidden curriculum of her classes, "I think when
you're learning, there's two things you're really learning. So, one wouldN
Up 15
5
278
ing
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
be the content. So, if I was in English class, or learning about Hamlet,
I'm learning about Hamlet, that's the content that I'm learning. And the
other is the actual situation you're in. So, while I'm learning Hamlet,
I'm also learning how to be in a class. And really, I'm not learning any-
thing new, because I've been in classes before, and I'm learning how to
sit down, and listen to this teacher, and take notes, and all that stuff."
As hidden curriculum theorists like Philip Jackson have observed, the
hidden curriculum of most classrooms is compliance; classes socialize
students how to follow directions, work individually, and satisfy the
demands of authority figures (teachers) 32
In contrast, the hidden curriculum of theater is about learning how
to function in a modern organization, in which expertise is distributed
horizontally, and what participants need to learn is to respect the work
of others, as well as how to negotiate problems that fall across different
areas. For example, one issue that required considerable coordination
in this show was the asides, moments when actors turned to speak di-
rectly to the audience. The idea was that the actor would turn, a
spotlight would shine on him or her, the actor would speak his or her
lines, then the actor would turn back, and the light would go off. But in
practice this was challenging, because both the timing of this maneuver
(turning on the lights exactly when the actor turned) and the positioning
of it (having the actor stand exactly where the light was to shine) were
hard to nail. It was so difficult that during a dress rehearsal two days
before the show they considered scrapping the idea entirely. But ulti-
mately they decided to keep the asides, and decided it was easier to move
the actors than to move the lights. This decision then led the crew to
strategically redo the marks on the stage that the actors used to position
themselves-for example, giving one actor who was particularly strug-
gling his own color of marks to make it easier to find his spot during the
action. During one of the dress rehearsals, one of the actors was so far"!
out of the light that he had to jump into the light, which brought a big.
laugh from the assembled group, and since the show was a comedy, they
decided to keep that in. Thus, through a process of discussion, mutual
adaptation, and a bit of improvisation, the group learned how to solve a
problem that fell across departmental lines.
In teaching these skills of teamwork and mutual respect, the show
had a considerable advantage: the adults involved themselves had
long histories of working with one another with significant trust fiRNING
mlet,
d the
mlet,
any-
w to
uff."
the
lize
the
OW
d
irki
a
n
DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
279
and mutual respect. As Naomi, the adult costume designer, said of
Larry, the adult lighting designer, "He will just stop by and ask if I
need something, and then he'll offer to do it, even if that is taking time
away from what he is working on." The adults then extended this kind
of mutual respect to the students, treating their roles and expertise
as if it were on par with the adults. For example, at one production
meeting, Naomi said that because of a family issue, she wouldn't be
able to make it to the designer run, an important rehearsal in which the
actors go through the show so that the various design teams can see it
and adjust their work as necessary. She then, very tentatively, asked if
the designer run could be moved from the following Friday to early
the week after. Here are my notes:
A lot of back and forth ensues. Ross, the crew director, says that it
would work for him; they could use the extra time to make more pro-
gress on the set. Emily checks the schedule for Monday and Tuesday
and discovers that two of the actors, including Pantalone, one of the
leads, are going to be out that day. Ross asks whether they could
check with the particular actors to switch. Ben says that he doesn't
feel comfortable asking that. Ross says it is more than a week's no-
tice, which is apparently the norm. Ben still demurs. Naomi con-
cludes, "I only wanted to switch if it was easy." They agree to record
the run and she will watch that and use it to give the costume
department notes.
What is notable about this interchange is how respectful the adults
are of one another and also of the students; Ross is trying to make it
work for Naomi, but Naomi is unwilling to ask for the switch if it is
inconvenient for the actors.
Students frequently described theater using the metaphor of
work-not in the sense that it couldn't be fun and playful, but in the
sense that it was a professional environment where the personal should
take a back seat to the requirements of the work. As one actor said, in
reaction to a question about what it was like to be part of a show where
their fellow actors were chosen for them, "The bright side of that is that
in theater we're thrown into a room with a bunch of people that we don't
really know, and we don't really have a say. I had to work with them
regardless. And getting that experience of having to deal with someone