280
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
that you don't like and having to work together is definitely something
that I'm glad that I had the opportunity to do." Students referred to
one another as ".
'professionals," as when Lisa, one of the actors, came
over to the costumes people during a break in a rehearsal and they asked
her opinion of her dress. "Oh, I don't know," she replied, "you guys are
the professionals." Cody wryly quoted Patriots coach Bill Belichick in
saying that the mantra of the program was "do your job," meaning that
"whatever you choose to do, care about it. You may not like every little
thing about it. You may not like—I got to sew that, I got to paint this.
But, they really care about it….. and that brings them back."
On the whole, both the students and adults characterized Servant
as fairly successful in generating mutually respectful relationships
while trying to build a very complex thing in a short amount of time.
Sage, the assistant stage manager, said that it sometimes got "pretty
fucking tense," but that on the whole, "it was just like everyone kind of
had good relationships." As Naomi more eloquently described the
show, "This was an incredibly respectful group of actors, and-as
complicated as it was—I just felt like there was so much respect for
each other's work product, sometimes that's the particular mix of per-
sonalities, or phase of the moon, this one was really remarkable."
Apprenticeship
Another critical aspect of theater, and one that made it distinctive from
school, was the strong element of apprenticeship in students' learning.
Students learned by doing, but they did so under the watchful eye
of people who had more experience. This was particularly true in the
production departments-lights, costumes, set, stage management—
where students described a process of rising through the ranks and
gradually gaining more responsibility. For example, Rosalind, the cos-
tume designer for the show, remembers initially shadowing in her first
production as a freshman, then moving to becoming a "changer,"
someone who literally changes an actor's costume during the show, and
then doing some design on some smaller shows before becoming the
lead student designer for Servant. Older students would, when they had
time, show younger ones exactly how things were done, as Sage de-
scribes how she learned stage managing in an earlier show from a girl
named Amanda:ARNING
lething
ried to
, came
r asked
lys are
lick in
ig that
r little
t this.
rvant
ships
time.
retty
nd of
1 the
I-as
t for
per-
rom
ing.
eye
the
t-
ind
DS-
rst
I,"
nd
he
ad
e-
irl
DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
28I
She showed me how to do everything, and she taught me how to
set up the binder, and what line notes were, and how she took
blocking notes for those shows, and how to do set lists, and ship
lists, and all of that. I mean she taught me a lot of stuff, I didn't
really do most of it, I guess for the most part. But, I was pretty
okay with that. I was just kind of like, "Oh man, I get to sit next
to a senior." So, yeah, I mean I think that was basically prelude
for me.
As Sage describes, the older students are not simply imparting tech-
nical knowledge; they are also role models, and even being included
among them can initially feel like an honor. This process is a more spe-
cific instantiation of what Lave and Wenger call legitimate peripheral
participation, a theory of apprenticeship learning that suggests people
learn by starting as "peripheral participants" in a domain and gradu-
ally gain expertise as they take on more central roles. 33
This particular theater program had the benefit of having adults
leading each of these departments, which gave students direct access
to people who had significantly more expertise than even the most ex-
perienced students. These adults had similarly been through their own
process of being mentored by more experienced people in their fields,
and were paying it forward. For example, Larry, the adult lighting de-
signer, had majored in light design as an undergraduate, and had worked
with a number of professional theaters doing part-time work with lights.
His position was originally part-time, and as the number of shows grew
and the program expanded, it gradually became a full-time job. But he
continues to work in summers and on weekends with professional and
community theaters, and, on occasion, when a job came up where he
was not available, had passed that opportunity to seniors or recent
graduates whom he had trained. Thus the adults involved in the show
had real, and in some cases recent or ongoing, experience in what they
were training the students, and students sometimes had opportunities
via these adults to participate in these domains beyond high school.
This was in sharp contrast to most regular classroom teachers in our
study, who had little ongoing connection to the professional work in
the disciplines that they taught.
Apprenticeship learning also differs from classroom learning in what
Roland Tharp has called the "jointness" of the endeavor between the282
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
adults and the students.?4 If in a regular class the student is trying to
please the teacher, and the teacher is playing the role of judge or um-
pire in evaluating students' work, in a theater production, everyone is
working together to make something for the audience. While the adults
were careful to give students the final say, they also had considerable
professional pride in what was being produced, and thus they worked
together to make sure that the work achieved their standards. For ex-
ample, Naomi, the beloved costumes designer, had decided to co-design
the show with Rosalind, a junior. This decision had come about as a
result of student demand, because students exiting the program had said
that there was sometimes too much student leadership and that the stu-
dents were losing out by not having the adults work directly with them.
Rosalind, in turn, described what it was like to work with Naomi,
whom she described as "one of the kindest people I know." "I thought
it was really special, because I'm not sure when the last time Naomi
designed a show was. ... It was really different than designing with a
student, and really special. Because she is so knowledgeable, and she is
so good at what she does, that I thought it gave me extra confidence in
what I was doing. Because I knew-Naomi had my back throughout the
whole thing really closely." Naomi and Rosalind went through the whole
process together-researching the period, developing a design and a
color scheme, creating an image board and a Pinterest, sewing the cos-
tumes, and then making adjustments as needed. In all of this, Rosalind
found that Naomi was "very calm, and she's so, so knowledgeable.
I don't know how she knows so much that she does, but she always has
knowledge about these teeny-tiny little intricacies of time periods or
even specific years, about different things. So, she can pinpoint really
early on, 'Oh, no, that's not going to work, [it's not the right] time pe-
riod' or ... 'that's two years early, but no one will know? Those sorts
of little things. And I think that's really nice, to have that sort of backup."
By working together to create something, Rosalind benefited from
Naomi's considerable expertise, but she still had the experience of
designing a show.
As students' roles increased as they got older, the tasks they were
asked to do also increased in complexity, which, in turn, helped build
more sophisticated understandings. Talia, for example, describes her
shift from an acting to a directing role as a move from part to whole,
from understanding the world only from the perspective of what she3
DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
283
needed to do to seeing how the entire production fits together. Larry,
the adult lighting designer, similarly said that his work with Liam, the
senior student lighting director, resembled more of a partnership than
a teacher-student relationship, because Liam now had enough experi-
ence to see the same complexities that Larry did. For example, he said,
students who were just starting out in lighting didn't have a picture in
their head of what the whole show would look like, and thus while he
could explain what they were doing and why, they didn't yet have a full
mental model of what it is they were trying to create. But with Liam,
who had designed a number of shows over the years, they could talk
both broad vision and implementation of particular scenes from the
start, because they could similarly envision what the final product might
look like. Throughout the process, both students and adults deferred
to Liam's decisions about lighting design, giving him respect that was
commensurate with the expertise he had developed
The Arc of a Powerful Learning Experience
The familiarity of theater masks the complexity of the learning that
underpins it. For a show to succeed, actors need to understand some-
thing about the history of the show, its period, and the author's intent;
develop a collective interpretation of how they are going to play the
show; understand each and every one of their lines-who they are in
that scene, what the purpose is of their words; develop actions and voice
inflections that communicate those purposes; internalize their lines so
that they can speak them without thinking about them; play off of the
other characters in their scene; and integrate all of this with costumes,
sets, and lighting. All of this is fraught with risk and vulnerability: the
students need to develop interpretations of characters that may fall flat;
they need to tap into parts of themselves and put those parts on display
live in front of hundreds of people. To achieve all of that requires in-
tegrating spheres that are usually kept distinct: passion with preci-
sion, head with heart and hands, conscious memory and unconscious
fluency, the individual parts and the collective whole. Part of why we
see theater, and other extracurriculars, as such promising platforms
for learning is that they have ways of enriching and integrating these
many spheres of learning.284
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
Setting a Foundation
The Servant of Two Masters was, everyone involved agreed, one of the
most complicated shows that the school had ever put on. The show is
an eighteenth-century comedy written by Carlo Goldoni in which the
title character has not one but two masters, resulting in a number of
comic mishaps such as being paid a debt "for your master" and not
knowing to whom the money should go. But it is not only comedy; it is
commedia dell'arte, an Italian style in which a troupe of actors are each
given a stock character to play (the old hag, the young buck) and an out-
line for a show, which they then are supposed to improvise by drawing
on the expected roles of those stock characters. In their version of
Servant, they would follow the lines (and not improvise them), but
they were also seeking to play the stock characters whom their roles
represented. On top of that, they decided to follow an interpretation
first put on by the Milwaukee Repertory Theater in 2004, in which
rather than always being the characters, the actors were sometimes a
theater troupe that was putting on the show. The audience would know
whether they were seeing the "play" (actors as stock characters) or the
"play prime" (the acting troupe scenario) because different parts of the
stage (and different lighting schemes) were used for each. The action
culminated with the servant lead Truffaldino getting married in the
play, but falling sick and dying as an actor playing the role, a duality
that the students had to communicate to the audience. As the actors
themselves attested, when they began they knew little about Servant,
commedia as a style, or the specific stock characters who they were
playing. How, in eight short weeks, did they learn all of it?
The earliest part of the process was spent with everyone doing some
research on the show, the time period, and the commedia style. Ben
offered some overall framing thoughts that laid out how commedia was
different from comedy, explained why they wanted to do the play prime
version of the play, and introduced some historical context. The actors
also watched clips from the United Kingdom's National Theatre of the
different stock characters they would be playing. On their own, some
of the actors watched YouTube videos of actors who had played their
role in this play or the stock character their character was associated
with. The show also benefited from two student dramaturgs, a new role
that the students themselves had initiated and was being piloted withARNING
of the
low is
h the
ser of
1 not
; it is
each
out-
ving
n of
but
oles
ion
lich
is a
ow
he
he
on
he
ty
rs
it,
e
DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
285
this show. The dramaturgs did their own research into the playwright's
intent and the history of the show and presented it to the cast. Hence,
in this early period, a variety of different forms of learning were being
used to triangulate Servant-direct adult instruction, collective student
analysis of videos of previous productions and interpretations of stock
characters, individual research by actors (both text and video), and par-
ticular student roles (the dramaturgs) in which selected students devel-
oped a specialized expertise that was then shared with the group.
An adult troupe that specialized in commedia was also a critical
resource. Found through social networks, this troupe came to a re-
hearsal, explained and demonstrated what many of the stock characters
did, and played some games with students in which they tried out some
of the stock characters and the physical motions that accompanied
them. Many of the actors credited the time with the adult troupe as
particularly important for helping them develop their "physicality,"
the movements that came with each of their characters. While most
of the actors in the show had acted before, none had experience with
the over-the-top motions that commedia requires, and several of them
described that challenge as the most significant stretch that the show
required. Working with the professional troupe had the benefits of
injecting expertise, providing feedback, and showing that there was a
real-world context for the students' work, all staple elements of theater
that are absent from most classes.
Learning by Doing
Then it was on to rehearsals. At the beginning the students engaged in
"table work," or reading through the play, line by line, trying to get fa-
miliar with the characters, the lines, and the rhythms between the
actors. Some of this took place sitting cross-legged on the floor of the
stage. Gradually the work progressed into more physical enactments of
scenes, still with scripts in hand.
The major task in these early rehearsals was for the actors to ven-
ture an initial version of their characters. Ben's view, which is shared
by many directors, is that taking this initial risk of putting something
out there is critical to everything that follows. He says he learned this
from his mentor, "Brother Ron," who was the director of his own high
school shows: "What I get from Brother Ron is, he would always say,286
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
'Don't talk, do. And I am really all about doing something, and then
analyzing the results, and not let's plan for two hours about what this
kind of second scene is going to be." Following from this philosophy,
Ben's most frequent piece of feedback was "make a choice," meaning
that an actor needed to make a strong decision about what they were
trying to do with each line and action. Particularly for the younger and
less experienced actors, this was not always so easy: they would appeal
to Ben for more direction, but his response was always the same: "you
need to make a choice, you need to make a decision and try it." From
Ben's point of view, it was always easier to give people feedback on what-
ever they tried, but you couldn't even begin until someone had ven-
tured something. "Make a choice" was also a pragmatic reaction to the
sheer volume of the task of putting on a play- there were, as Ben em-
phasized frequently in rehearsals, many too many lines and actions for
Ben and Talia to try to direct each of them. Student initiative is thus
not optional but rather a necessity if the play is going to come off at all.
A related point is that Ben was trying to encourage the actors to take
risks in what they put forward. As he said on a number of occasions,
"the greater danger is in not taking risks." Like a sculptor, once a lump
of clay assumes an initial form, it can be molded into different shapes,
but until it is created, there is nothing to mold it into. As Ben describes
it, "It's way easier for me to pull back than to try to pull something out."
More experienced actors understood this. Alex, the lead of the show
who was also an experienced improv actor, described rehearsal as a pro-
cess of trying out different possibilities, "If you think something is
funny, you should try it and you should do it. If you think it's a good
idea, definitely go for it, and it's not a big deal if you mess up. People
aren't really going to think about it that much. It's just not a big deal."
Alex lived up to this mantra during rehearsals; he tried a variety of dif-
ferent ways of prancing across the stage to emphasize his characters'
attention-getting nature; he tried bawdy ways of delivering lines in
seduction scenes. As he said, some of these worked and others did not,
but he definitely got further faster by making these choices. In contrast,
some of the younger and less experienced actors on occasion responded
to Ben's "what choice were you making there?" with "I'm not sure" and
the lack of these choices meant that it took a lot longer for them to de-
velop their characters. Much as design thinking has a mantra of "fail
faster" and advice columns say "nothing ventured, nothing gained," the
same was true for actors developing their roles.
DI
in
th
in
be
th
se
Ir
W:
th
ac
de
pl
be
ca
to
pr
or
se
Li
he
in
ye
of
tO
ac
To
G
pr
CONG
en
У,
DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
287
Part of why this was hard was that it required shedding deeply held
inhibitions. When we interviewed the actors after the show, about half
described themselves as extroverts who were "heightened versions of
themselves" on stage, whereas the other half described themselves as
introverts, for whom the stage enabled them to do things they would
never do in real life. Renee, a very shy girl who played one of the
female leads, Smeraldina, said that the character initially "terrified" her,
because "she was bawdy, loud, overtly sexual— all the things that I'm
not." And she was not the only one—a number of the actors said that
they found the early rehearsals very challenging because they were es-
sentially out there naked-just them, trying to find their character.
Ironically, they said, performing in front of the audience on show night
was comparatively easier, because by that point it was the character, not
their real self, that was on display.
Another complicating dynamic in the early rehearsals was that the
actors did not yet know each other that well, and some were trying to
demonstrate that they belonged in the show. Raven, a sophomore, ex-
plains, "So, at the beginning of the process, I think it is really hard,
because you haven't gotten a chance to know most of the kids in this
cast. I mean I was familiar with all of them, but I mean I really did not
know these kids, I didn't trust them. So, it seems like everybody is trying
to impress one another. Like, 'Oh, I'm the best actor, I'm the best actor,
you know. This is why I got this part?" She was "definitely trying to im-
press everybody else as Raven, and —as Raven, I wasn't even focusing
on Beatrice (her character]. I was trying to show everybody that I de-
serve this role, you know." Ben tried to counter these dynamics, said
Liza, a freshman, but not always successfully: "I mean I noticed [Ben),
he was always like 'You don't have anything to prove. You're already
in' But I felt I had to show that I was worth being in the show, and that
yes, I could do it." Much as university freshmen spend the first month
of the year trying to show that they are not an admissions mistake, ac-
tors' individual desires to show that they belonged got in the way of
actually working together on the content of the play.
Tone and Culture
Given these challenges, establishing the right tone for the rehearsal
process-one that was free of judgment, engendered trust, and en-
couraged people to take risks-was absolutely critical for the show's288
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
success. On the first day the group co-constructed norms that would
reflect many of the major challenges of the process to come, including
"try new things; make informed choices; focus on supporting others;
have fun; create a warm, judgment-free environment; and expect to
make mistakes." Both Ben and Talia had also thought a lot about the
nature of their feedback and the notes they gave to actors; as Talia
said, "the wrong note can break an actor." They tried to calibrate the
amount of feedback they gave; Ben said one of the things he learned
over his years directing was too give many fewer notes, because actors
couldn't take in all of the feedback at once. Ben also explicitly tried to
focus on praising them for making a choice: "whether or not the choice
worked," he gave "positive feedback on them making a choice."
If part of the key to giving good feedback was its tone, the content of
the feedback also mattered. Most of Ben's feedback was less about is-
suing a directive and more about offering an option. The actors really
appreciated this style, because it put them in charge of developing their
own characters but also provided ideas for what they might try. Says
Matt, "Most of the feedback that he gave was not super like, 'This is
the way that it's going to be, and there's no like argument about it? Usu-
ally it was more like, 'What if you tried it this way, or think about
this?' ... And so, I do think that we definitely had our opportunities
to think about our roles like ourselves, and not, you know, have him
dictate everything." Ben also tried to situate the feedback as coming
less from him and more from what the show needed: "If they think that
I'm talking about my personal preference, then they have to buy into
my personality, they have to buy into my set of values. ... It's not about
me, it's about what I am seeing as an audience member, and my inter-
pretation of that. It's not like you need to do this for me, you need to
do it for you, you need to do it for the audience." And because theater
is a performance medium, it was frequently true that Ben's comments
mirrored what we, as outsider observers, were seeing as prospective
audience members. Some things the actors tried "worked" and others
did not-hugs appeared natural or forced, jokes landed or fell flat-and
thus much of what Ben did was simply gently anticipating the audi-
ence's reactions to what the actors were trying. This feedback was crit-
ical to creating the standards that would make the play worthy of a
real audience.
These processes added up, and over time the actors became in-
creasingly comfortable with each other and taking risks. Here Raven
t
I
€
t
F
S
a
a
a
fig
th
ac
th
au
sa:
it'
de
th
to
inDEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
289
describes how things evolved from the initial days: "Once you have
that foundation of trust in your cast, it's not about, 'Oh, who is watching
me' anymore, it's about 'How do we create a space of taking risks to-
gether, and giving each other those notes." Over time, she says, it gets
easier and more fluid, because "you're on stage with people you've grown
to trust, grown to have very close friendships with, grown to love."
Raven's description brings to mind research on how teams develop-
moving through stages that scholar Bruce Tuckman memorably de-
scribed as "forming, storming, norming, and performing" - with trust
and time as the key elements that enables coordinated action 36 Daisy, a
freshman, adds that the way in which the directing team treated the
actors mirrored what they were hoping the actors would do in the show,
a parallelism that we earlier called symmetry:
Ben and Talia were very good directors. They were directorial-
they had enough of an influence to keep a bunch of rowdy high
schoolers under control. But they also had enough leniency to
let us have a little fun, have a little joke... make fun of the fact
that somebody has a mask that has a footlong nose on it. And at no
point was he like, "This is a theater show. You shouldn't be having
fun. You should just be putting a comedy on for people." Because
in order to put on a comedy, you're supposed to have fun yourself.
And I think a big part of it was that a lot of us had a lot of fun.
Engaging Heads, Hands, and Heart
Even with the help of a supportive environment, the actors still had to
figure out how to play their characters. "Making a choice" was harder
than it looked. And Ben's other most quoted piece of advice- "play an
action, not an emotion" —was intended to help them think about why
their character was feeling a particular way in order to convey it to the
audience. For instance, here Liza describes the problem with "playing
sad." She says, "I mean if you play sad, there's no real motivation. You're
just sad, but you don't know why, you don't know how you got sad. And
it's just kind of shallow, and it's not really like real people. They have
depth, they have— they have lives and they have experiences, and all
that affects the emotion." So, how would you do that? "I think you have
to do your research and really think about it. We had this script divided
in beats, so each beat had a specific goal and action." We also see in290
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
Liza's account an iteration between whole and part— she is both trying
to think about her character's overall motivations and working on the
purpose of specific lines and actions.
Many of the actors said that the key to finding their characters was
'finding the right "physicality" for the role. This suggests an inter-
section in their learning between the cognitive and the physical, the
head and the body. For example, Raven was playing Beatrice, a woman
who disguises herself as a man for most of the play, before reemerging
as a woman at the end. She describes how she found her way into Bea-
trice, suggesting that through the reading of the script and the table
work, she didn't really have it. The turning point, she said, was "getting
the physicality of being a man, because that was my mentality. Once I
got into the physicality, becoming that character would not be as hard.
When really people say it's the other way around." She says that she
consulted a transgendered friend. "I talked to my friend who's trans
about what his transition was between womanly physicality to manly
physicality. How to drop your voice, how to walk, and how to talk. So,
once I got that down, I delved deep into her emotional state. ... It went
along in steps. I got my physicality down, then I got the mentality and
my character down." Nico, who played Florindo, a blithely arrogant
prince, said that watching a video of professional commedia actors
playing his role was helpful, because the haughty physicality of a pre-
vious Florindo helped him understand his character. But translating this
observation into action still didn't happen until he physically began to
try the movements: "I think the first day that I didn't have my script in
my hand was the first day I really discovered my character. Before that,
I was very not sure of what my character was—I knew what my char-
acter was trying to accomplish, and what his goals were, because that's
a lot of the stuff that we worked on, characterization, at rehearsals. But,
I didn't really know what kind of physicality he had, or how to achieve
his goals."
If part of finding the character was integrating mind and body, an-
other part was summoning the emotions that animated their role. All
of the actors said that even though they were playing eighteenth-century
Italian characters, they needed to connect themselves to their roles,
which is what gave the characters depth. Raven, for example, said that
"I would take monologues from Beatrice, and I would translate it into
my own words, and I would use my own emotion. I did it as Raven. And
t
E
P
t
t.
a
S.
a
L
A
a
t.
S.
a
h
tr
a
a
st*NG
ng
he
as
r-
ne
In
1-
I
I.
DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
29 T
then, once I did it as Raven, I took from my emotion, and I took from
what action I was supposed to put into these lines" and infused that into
Beatrice. As Nico eloquently described the importance of emotion to
powerful acting, "Teaching can be conveying information, but I think
the essence of theater, like other art, is conveying emotion. So, you're
trying to bring the emotion from your body to another actor's body,
and then together to the audience, so that the audience can feel em-
pathy, and then kind of have catharsis about what just happened in the
show, feel those emotions in a way that would reflect on the show."
Powerful learning often requires integrating the cognitive and the affec-
tive, the mind and the heart, and theater as a form consistently pushed
actors to develop and use together these modes of understanding.
Layers of Learning
As the show moved into its middle and later stages, each week brought
an additional layer of complexity to the actors' task. In short order, over
the course of October, they went "off book," meaning that they needed
to remember their lines rather than look at scripts; they blocked the
show, meaning they had to remember movements as well as lines; they
integrated costumes, lights, and props, meaning they had to learn to
move in new garb and use new objects; and then finally they were doing
three dress rehearsals and then three shows, meaning they had to run
the whole show through without breaks. Each of these new layers had
a "one step forward, two steps back," quality to it, with much of what
had been developed in the previous stage temporarily lost as students
tried to focus on the new dimension to be incorporated. For example,
in one of the first rehearsals off book, Ben offered some stern feedback
to the actors who were still a little shaky on their lines: "Hold. I want
all actors on stage please. This is a reality check. Right now what we
are watching is a line through. I'd rather have you calling for more
lines. ... There is no energy being passed back and forth. You need to
stop thinking about next and think about now. This is a very safe run."
Scholars of expertise have described four stages of learning: uncon-
scious incompetence (you don't know what you don't know), conscious
incompetence (you know what you don't know), conscious competence
(you can do something but only by thinking about it), and, finally, un-
conscious competence (you can do it automatically) /In the show, as292
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
new layers were introduced, things that had reached the stage of un-
conscious competence (for instance, how the actors played the charac-
ters) were temporarily lost as the actors tried to remember their lines
(conscious competence). Thus, each new layer entailed loss as well as
gain, until a new equilibrium was reached in which the actors had un-
conscious competence over both their lines and their characters. The
key to progress in each of these new phases was time to get acclimated.
For instance, while the first dress rehearsal was by shared consensus a
terrible run, by the third and final dress rehearsal the show was in good
shape, not only because of corrections from the previous nights, but also
because much of what had previously been established reemerged once
actors became comfortable with the costumes, lights, and process of
doing a full show.
Refining and Performing
If the beginning of the rehearsal process was about creation, and the
middle was about consolidation and integration, the final step was about
two things: increasingly detailed fine-tuning and performing. In terms
of fine-tuning, the arc of the show resembled the arc of almost any act
of production; anyone who has written an essay, developed a presenta-
tion, or created a project knows that the end of the process requires
careful attention to very small things to make the product shine. (One
aphorism for this is the "ninety-ninety rule" -the last Io percent takes
go percent of the time, a mantra that acknowledges how time-consuming
and important this last period is.) In the case of the show, the fine-
tuning came in the form of increasingly lengthy rehearsals in the final
two weeks, and feedback on increasingly small details. For example,
in the notes after the second-to-last dress rehearsal, Ben tells Matt,
"Open that downstage foot up a little more. We are seeing a lot of pro-
file of that mask." He tells Jon, "Make sure when you are talking to June
in the trunk scene, she was upstage of you, and thus you were speaking
away from the audience." They also used some of their time to zero in
on particular scenes or moments within scenes that were challenging,
with a few scenes slated for an extra run-through before the final full
dress rehearsal.38 And, as described earlier, there was a lot of work on
the asides, trying to get the timing exactly right between the turns of
the actors and the appearance of the lights.DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
293
The other major task for this final period was preparing for the act
of performance. Performing requires a combination of releasing energy
and controlling anxiety. Particularly because it was a comedy, everyone
was highly attentive to the pace of the show; for it to work, the lines
should move quickly from one to another, heightening audience antici-
pation and building toward the verbal and physical punchlines. To
build this energy, here was the scene at intermission back stage:
ANDRE: "Eight minutes to places."
TALIA: "When you're ready come into the little theater. Guys can you get
into a circle."
Raven arrives. "The atmosphere is moving quickly."
ANDRE: "Five minutes to places."
TALIA: "What do we need? What do we need? What do we need?"
ACTORS: "Energy, energy, energy, energy."
They form a circle and begin bouncing off of each other. They are being
thrown from one to another. It sounds like a fight scene. I can feel the
energy, they are in a circle.
TALIA: "Okay, we are going to do two rounds of 'Ride that Pony.' And then
energy, energy focus."
They form one inner circle, and a second outer circle: the inner circle
moves one way and the outer circle moves the other, and they shake their
rumps at each other as they go by. They start to chant, led by Talia but
with everyone joining in: "Ride, ride ride that pony, back to back, side to
side, this is what we do. Get up, get up, and ride that big fat pony. Ride,
ride ride that pony; get up, get up, and ride that big fat pony. Energy,
energy, energy, and then shake."
TALIA: "Andre, how many minutes?"
ANDRE: "Three minutes to places."
TALIA: "Take care of what you need to do in those three minutes."
ACTOR, ON THE WAY OUT: "Fan-fucking tastic-let's go to Act II!"
While building this energy, the actors were also trying to manage
anxiety and channel their nervous energy toward the performance.
Renee, for example, said that her strategy was to tell herself "obnox-
iously positive mantras" backstage: "You can, you know you can, you
can and you must, it's too late to back out now." Talia, who as a senior
and assistant director was one of the leaders of the show, remembers294
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
her own moment of freaking out as a sophomore before a performance:
"I remember one night, the first night of opening, I was just so over-
whelmed by the pressure... I couldn't handle it, and I just started
bawling ten minutes before we were set to go on stage. And I remember
I had to get it all out, and Mr. Black was comforting me outside, and I
had to quickly finish up crying, get my make-up on, be fixed, and head
out, and start right away." Cody says that managing this pressure to
perform live is difficult, but a critical part of what makes it such a
powerful learning experience. "You learn about yourself, and how to
deal with those things. On stage, it's the live moment, there's no stop-
ping. You can't stop, you have to keep going. You have to. You know,
film, you can just cut, go back. [In theater], it's beginning to end."
All too quickly, performance night came. To someone who had seen
the show at all stages of its construction-rehearsal in the band room
with scripts in hand, the set halfway constructed, the lights hung but
not fully programmed it was remarkable to see the whole thing come
together as one performance. The presence of the audience added
the finishing layer to the show-after weeks of doing comedy with
no one there to laugh, the presence of live laughter from people who
hadn't heard the jokes a thousand times injected new energy into the
performance and confidence into the actors. Renee, whose struggles
with the flirtatious nature of her character were so noticeable at the first
rehearsal we witnessed, brought the house down as a coquettish Smer-
aldina: at one point she was unable to finish her lines because the audi-
ence reaction to her previous line was so enthusiastic. The asides were
not quite perfect, but close, and Nico's leap into the light brought a
huge laugh from the crowd. As the show concluded, the actors filed
past Ben backstage, which Ben remembers as his best moment of the
show: "I mean the Friday night was their best performance, and the
joyous moment backstage when I ran out after the curtain call, and
just gave them all high-five on the way back. Their joy was a huge high."
After eight weeks of hard work, the show night brought the kind of
exhilaration that comes from a job well done.
Overall, the show, from its first rehearsal to its final performance,
created space for different stages of learning—at the beginning, low-
risk opportunities to develop creativity; at the middle, opportunities for
consolidation and integration; and at the end, chances for detailed re-
finement. It enabled students to gradually develop real expertise, movingDEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
295
incrementally from unconscious incompetence (never having heard of
commedia dell'arte) to eventually a modest degree of unconscious com-
petence (having the physicality of commedia be a part of their acting
repertoire). It provided opportunities to integrate mind and body into
one unified interpretation of the play. And it coupled the participants'®
passion for theater, which provided the spark and sustained the mo-
mentum, with high levels of precision, as they worked to perfect the
production.
The Whole Game at a Junior Level
High school theater is an example of what learning scientist David Per-
kins calls the "whole game at the junior level."39 Perkins's point is that
in variants of games like little league baseball, players do not spend a
year learning to catch and another to pitch and another to bat. Rather,
they play the whole game from the start, just at the level at which they
can play it. The idea is that playing the whole game at the junior level
helps the players see how baseball as a whole works, as well why they
would want to put practice time into learning the specific skills. The
production we saw was a junior form of what college or professional ac-
tors do although a professional theater would have more resources,
more expertise, and potentially more time, much of what happened was
the same. The student actors in the theater group were doing what pro-
fessional actors do, just at the level they could do it - developing an
interpretation of a role; preparing their minds, bodies, and voices; re-
hearsing and refining their characterizations within the larger context
of the play; and ultimately, seeking to move an audience.
In so doing, they also could draw on many of the resources, or af-
fordances, provided by theater as a field. Theater as a field provides a
thick infrastructure for doing this work. It employs a series of familiar
roles (set and lighting crew, costume designers, dramaturgs, stage man-
ager, director) and expectations for what people in those roles will do.
It offers a technical language, developed over many generations, that
enables precise feedback in ways that are understood by everyone
involved. It creates a rhythm or temporal arc to the work- table work,
blocking, scene work, run throughs, tech week, dress rehearsals, show.
It creates role models, in theater or movie stars, who are well-known296
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
and provide templates for what student-actors might someday become.
And it builds in an external audience for the work; people who know
what a production is and why one would want to attend a show. That it
is a recognizable and valued form also helps secure the lengthy after-
school time it demands of students each day as well as the public budget
for the space and for the work of the adults involved in the program.
This was different from what we observed in many academic classes.
In science, for example, students, even when they were doing labs, were
mostly going through a series of steps to demonstrate a principle that
had already been discovered by previous scientists. In a sense, this is
the opposite of real science— actual scientists explore what is not known
as opposed to trying to verify what is already known.
Or compare theater to project-based learning. A project-based teacher
has many of the same goals as a theater director: she wants students to
create an authentic product that will matter to the student, demonstrate
some understanding of the content, and be valued by an external audi-
ence. But she has so much less to work with: she needs to explain to her
students what the final product will be, even though they have never
seen what it is they are trying to produce; if she wants students to take
roles in their groups she needs to explain what those roles are and why
they matter; if she wants to give feedback she has no specific shared
technical language to rely on; if she wants to create an arc to the learning
she needs to explain what the stages are in the development of a project
and why they are important; if she wants peer mentoring and appren-
ticeship she likely will need to make special arrangements because more
experienced students are likely in other grades and thus not in her class;
she will likely need long blocks, especially toward the end of a project,
but will be on a fixed schedule of short blocks; if she wants an audience
for the work, she will have to make special arrangements to recruit one
and she will have to explain to them what the students are doing and
why; and finally, if she is going to develop resources for this project,
she will need to convince the principal, the parents, and the school
board of the value of a product and a mode of learning that they likely
don't understand and may not value.
Scholar Barbara Rogoff has suggested that apprenticeships work on
three planes: the individual, the interpersonal, and the community, 40
All of those dimensions are present in theater: individuals develop iden-
tities that link them to theater; the interpersonal plane is the level"NING
ome.
nOW
at it
ter-
get
es.
ire
lat
DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
297
through which the participants develop the show together; and the
community level provides the audience, the space, and the financial sup-
port for the performance. But our research suggests that there is an-
other level that infuses the work, which is the way in which the field
structures and enables much of what happens for the students in their
own theater work. If we want to make the kind of powerful learning
experiences that happen in theater more the norm in regular school,
we likely will have to develop similar fields in more classically academic
arenas.
Limits and Tensions
While there is much to admire about this theater production, some
cautions are in order. The first is external generalizability. Theater at
Attainment High is special even compared to other similar large
comprehensive high schools nearby, it has one of the most developed
high school theater programs in the area. Its spirit and ethos reflect the
influence of its director, Cody Black, whose particular mixture of com-
munity building, ability to help students find their authentic selves,
humor, and political savvy was critical for setting the tone and building
the program. Obviously there are theater programs where directors
are tyrannical, students are cliquish and catty, and many other unde-
sirable things happen. Thus theater is a container, within which both
good and bad things can happen. The success of this particular theater
program is due in part to the opportunities created by the traditions
around theater, but those opportunities in turn depend on the judg-
ment, wisdom, and humanity of the adults who develop what students
experience. We see theater as a more promising container than the con-
tainers for many academic classes, but it is a container nonetheless.
More specifically, there were also some tradeoffs within this produc-
tion that likely point to some broader tensions. One was the sheer
number of hours needed to produce such a complicated show, which
worked against the kind of experimentation that might have led to a
deeper grappling with its subtleties and meanings. Specifically, the show
needed to be blocked in order for the lighting team to do its work, which
meant that much of the time in the middle weeks was spent trying
to figure out exactly who was going to go where when, as opposed to298
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
developing characterization, which is what both the actors and the di-
rectors would have preferred to do. This allocation of time was inti-
mately related to the length and size of the show-Servant is a full two
act, two-hour (or more) play, with eleven actors, which meant that
there were many, many lines to be learned and scenes to be blocked,
important but prosaic tasks that took up much of the rehearsal time. If
deeper learning frequently results from a "less is more" approach, that
injunction was not heeded in this case. Butfat the same time, what
might have been good for the depth of the actors' learning might not
have met other important demands: in particular, cultural expecta-
tions that high school theater groups produce large full-length
shows, which is something the actors look forward to and the audience
expects. The theater program puts on some shorter plays each spring,
but it is unwilling to buck the traditions of having several large dramas
and a musical each year.
The short timeframe allocated for the play's production also limited
students' understanding of some of its historical or cultural context.
In our conversations with students as well as our observations of the
rehearsal process, we did not see much evidence of a depth of under-
standing about Goldoni, his contemporaries, or the history, culture,
art, politics, or music of Venice at the time. This would have required
substantially more than the initial research of the students and the dra-
maturgs. Linking courses in English and history to productions in
yearlong sequences would provide opportunities for deeper learning
about the context out of which a play had emerged.
There is also a related tension between process and product. Ben's
seminal theater experience was as a high school student in a small Cath-
olic prep school, where a man named "Brother Ron" organized theater
shows by putting the actors largely in charge. Brother Ron would sit in
the back, or would leave the theater entirely, and, having given the
actors a task or a scene, would let them develop it together. Says Ben,
"And so, from a very early age, I learned the value of getting peer-to-
peer feedback, and how to give peer-to-peer feedback, and just the idea
like we were the creators in a lot of ways. He would come up with the
design, but he gave us a lot of freedom which I really, really valued."
When Ben first came to Attainment High, he tried to introduce this
approach with his first show. As he describes it, it really didn't take:
"It was a rough transition, it really was. I tried to hit it with the same
DI
ki
W.
ca
tir
le:
va
an
ac
as
at.
sti
sp:
hie
Dr
do
as:
kid
hai
litt
sist
cre
Ho
In t
sho
cres
buil
bec
com
fror
of u
nityDEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
299
kind of magic touch that Brother Ron had about like 'We're all
working together, we're a troupe, kind of arm them with knowledge,
and let them go off, but it was just not jiving with the culture." Specifi-
cally, Ben says, people at Attainment High were used to a more "tradi-
tional" approach to theater, with the director organizing the action,
leading warmups, and giving notes. The size and expected production
values also inhibited more actor-led theater, because with a large cast
and a number of departments that needed to be integrated, more pre-
planning was needed to develop a coordinated show.
The version Ben eventually landed on was a bit of a hybrid-he gave
actors as much freedom as he could to develop their interpretations,
while retaining overall control and direction. This "happy medium,"
as he called it, enabled him to meet the various expectations of a show
at Attainment High while also seeding some student initiative. But he
still talked wistfully about the initiative and creativity that had been
sparked by Brother Ron's methods. "The creativity was at an all-time
high; we could do anything. We did a production of Midsummer Night's
Dream that ended up with five different concepts, which is why it didn't
do very well. There was a lot of room for creativity, growth was as much
as you opened yourself up to the opportunity, and also that the older
kids were really allowed... to do something, because it was a lot in their
hands." By comparison, theater at Attainment High was a little safer, a
little more adult-directed, which led to productions that were more con-
sistently high-quality, but at the cost of more student initiative and raw
creativity.
How Deep Learning Develops: A Theory
In the Introduction, we argued that those interested in "deeper learning"
should be particularly attentive to three qualities: mastery, identity, and
creativity. Mastery because you cannot learn something deeply without
building up considerable skill and knowledge in that domain; identity
because it is hard to become deeply learned at anything without be-
coming identified with the domain; and creativity because moving
from taking in someone else's ideas to developing your own is a big part
of what makes learning "deep." A fourth important quality is commu-
nity, for it is in communities that this learning frequently takes place.300
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
A THEORY OF DEEPER LEARNING OVER TIME
COMMUNITY 4
COMMUNITY 3
MASTERY
CREATIVITY
COMMUNITY 2
IDENTITY
COMMUNITY 1
SAME GAME AT INCREASING LEVELS
OF SOPHISTICATION OVER TIME
Part of what the example of theater enables us to do is to put these
qualities into dynamic motion and see how they reinforce each other
and create ever-deepening cycles of learning over time. We could
imagine mastery-identity-creativity as a self-reinforcing upward spiral,
where identity is the fuel and motivation, creativity offers the goal that
stretches students' powers, mastery is the base that needs to be devel-
oped for the creative product to achieve quality, and community is the
environment within which the learning takes place. This theory builds
on previous work and integrates a variety of perspectives on learning
into one vision of how significant learning accumulates over time.41
This figure provides a visual depiction of this model.
We think this model can describe how deep learning develops in any
domain, but we will stay with our example of theater to explain how it
works. With respect to mastery, there are no value-added scores in
theater, but there are a number of processes that produce increasing
expertise over time. Within a given production, participants have an
opportunity to play the "whole game" of theater; they learn how a show
is put together from start to finish, they learn much of the technical
language of theater, and they have opportunities to develop ideas and
interpretations and to receive many rounds of detailed feedback on their
work from more knowledgeable others. There are also opportunities
to practice the particularly troublesome spots-while there is a lot of
whole-game perspective, this is complemented by particular emphasis
on the things that need work, which is a critical part of developing mas-
tery. Over the course of a high school career, there will be many rep-
etitions of this process, and, for many, increasingly larger roles as theyDEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
30I
demonstrate more expertise. There is also differentiation built into the
process: relative novices have only a few lines to deliver, whereas more
experienced actors have many more lines and may be assuming new
characters that stretch their repertoire. In this way, everyone is pushed
at their zone of proximal development.
All of this work is fueled by the motivation that is critical to any
sustained learning. This motivation comes from students' identifica-
tion with theater as a domain, as well as their desire to become better
at their craft and to produce high-quality productions. Students de-
scribed the theater program as a home within a large high school, one
that provided both an individual identity for each participant and a
collective identity as members of a shared artistic endeavor. Within
theater, the opportunity to be an actor, or to work on lighting, cos-
tumes, or crew, provided a further chance to find a subgroup of people
with whom one shared a set of interests and a community. Being part
of theater and its community was what sustained students' participa-
tion, which they needed to stay in the learning "spiral" and build
mastery over time.
What made this sustained work "deeper" was the element of cre-
ativity. Students not only needed to learn about the play, the roles, and
the time period; they also had to develop their own interpretation of
how the play would be performed. Participants described the difference
between reading a play in class and putting one on as the difference be-
tween working in two dimensions and three. As Emily explained, "It's
that distinction between analyzing and making something. I think an-
alyzing can only go so far. ... Whereas creation, you can make what-
ever you want." She contrasted reading Romeo and Juliet with staging
it: "I stage-managed Romeo and Juliet last year, and so that was the first
time I had, you know, stage-managed something that I'd read before.
And that was a different experience, like you can see it come to life. Like
when you're involved in a production, you watch it from nothing, go
to, you know, set, lights, and everything."
Nico went one step further in contrasting the passivity of school to
the activity of the stage:
Because classroom learning is not about expression, it's about ab-
sorbing. ... As a student, you have to be the audience, you have to
like absorb that information, and maybe use your personality to
1 1,1
MARIUL
UMOLANAT302
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
interpret it, which is I guess like completely opposite from theater
I think.
How is theater the opposite?
Because theater as an actor, it's more like being a teacher, like
you're taking this script, this like knowledge that other people have
given you, like all this compiled information, all this storyline, and
you're putting it in yourself, and then you're sending it out to many
audience members, and many students. And then, being a student
is more like being an audience member, because you're taking what
the teacher is expressing and absorb it, and remember it.
If Bloom's taxonomy places remembering at the bottom and cre-
ating at the top, putting on a production pushes students to move
through the levels of the taxonomy-remembering, understanding,
and analyzing--but doing so in the service of an act of synthesis and
creation.
If we imagined this self-reinforcing cycle of mastery, identity, and
creativity as a spiral that leads upward over time, with participants cir-
cling back to the same tasks again and again at increasing levels of so-
phistication, another key idea is that each community in which the
learner participates adds something important and distinct. A key part
of the learning process is the nature of these communities, which have
to be simultaneously safe enough that people feel open to taking risks
and expressing vulnerability, but exacting enough to create real stan-
dards and give, when necessary, critical feedback. Each production cre-
ates such a community, and thus each one creates an opportunity to
learn something a little different-with a different play, potentially a
different director, and a different group of cast members. Alex, the lead
in the show, describes what it was like to move from community the-
ater to theater at Attainment High:
So, I first started in a very non-theater town. Like there was tons
of opportunity, because there's tons of community theater, tons of
community theater shows going on. But they weren't like high-
quality production. But it gave me like the basics, and got me
comfortable on stage. And then, I got to a point where like I wasn't
learning anything from there anymore. Like the last role I did
there, I was the main character, it was Tom Sawyer, and I was TomDEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
303
Sawyer. And I did fine in that, and that was good. And then I just
felt like there wasn't anything that I was learning from each show.
And then we moved here, and I started learning a bunch from
being in the shows here. And I learned a ton from the comedy
troupes for sure. And it encouraged me to do my own research,
and I'm doing this independent study. ... And I know, I'm defi-
nitely still learning things, because it's given me opportunity to
do things on my own, but I don't feel like I'm being taught things.
Thus through repeated cycles, in different and increasingly sophis-
ticated communities, Alex gradually grew as an actor.
This theory of how people become deep learners integrates quite dif-
ferent theories of learning, which is part of why we are attracted to it as a
model. There is, in one sense, a very constructivist, learning-by-doing
emphasis, which connects to the way that theater is a space of active
learning where one learns in part through trial and error — and where if
nothing is ventured, nothing is gained. It also is consistent with progres-
sive visions of schooling in its emphasis on developing an authentic
product, and tapping the intrinsic motivation, creativity, and passion of
the learner. But at the same time, it is also a view in which the domain
structures the learning, creates roles and an expected temporal arc, and
leaves a large place for informed external feedback from more knowl-
edgeable others. It also emphasizes heavily the role of disciplined prac-
tice, which we generally think of as hallmarks of more conservative or
traditional visions of learning. There is also a balance between individual
and community—it is the individual who has to develop new skills, who
helps direct their learning, and who becomes more skilled over time, but
it is the community that structures the learning and creates the context
in which it happens. We see these many integrations as critical for a real-
istic theory of how people come to know, be, and do something deeply.
Beyond Theater
The following elements make theater a powerful learning environment:
• Purpose and performance
• Choice304
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
• Community
• Interdependent roles
• Use of heads, hands, and heart
• An arc of learning
• Apprenticeship
• Offering the whole game at a junior level
There are good reasons to think that these same elements are crit-
ical in other extracurricular contexts. Consider the making of a news-
paper. Like theater, there is a purpose that is shaped by a public
product. Like theater, people have chosen to be there, and, more spe-
cifically, they have chosen to work on different sections (arts, sports,
news, design) because those sections are consistent with their interests
and identities. These roles are interdependent, both in that all of them
are required for the successful production of the paper, and, sometimes
in the sense that they literally need to be aligned, such as when an il-
lustration or a photo accompanies a story. Meetings are held that par-
allel the production meetings in theater, where different departments
report in on their developing work and collective decisions are made.
There is a temporal arc to the work, beginning with a brainstorming
round (what should we cover? what special issues might we explore?), a
middle stage where the different pieces are edited and integrated into
one layout, and then a final stage of proofing, which focuses on very
detailed refining of the work. Older students have more significant roles
and younger ones have smaller roles, a situation that creates significant
opportunities for apprenticeship and hands-on learning. Finally, while
it is undoubtedly a junior version, the core tasks are the same as what
happens for college or professional newspapers, and students have many
opportunities over the course of their high school career to play the
"whole game" of creating a newspaper.
High school debate is another promising arena. In a separate paper
with Pooja Bakhai, we report on the results of a study that we conducted
of high school debate that was similar in methods and scale to this study
of theater. 4 The study was conducted in a pair of schools where more
than 75 percent of students received free or reduced-price lunch and
all of the participants in debate were students of color. Here we ob-
served a number of similar themes: the authentic public purpose
created by public debate motivated considerable study and practice;DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
305
students had chosen to be there (and, for more experienced students,
chosen to stay); and there were interdependent roles, because students
debated in teams and needed to find complementary ways to build off
of their partners' strengths. Students remarked on the integration of
head, hands, and heart, explaining that a good debate lay at the inter-
section of logos (logic), pathos (passion), and ethos (empathy), and
that they might be strong in one but need work on another. Themes of
apprenticeship were highly present: there were four levels of debate,
beginning with "novice" and moving up through "open," which en-
abled students both to form peer communities with students at their
level and to apprentice students who were earlier in their trajectories.
The most experienced debaters had formed communities not just at
their school but also with other debaters in the city, whom they met
with on their own time and used as feedback and research partners.
Debate was also particularly good as a vehicle for learning academic
content—the debate topic at the time of our study was U.S. foreign
policy with regard to human rights in China as well as the South China
Sea, and the students researched the ins and outs of this topic as if it
were life or death. Debate, like theater, shaped students' identities: those
who had been debating for longer saw it as a core part of their selves,
and talked passionately about how it had changed them—in partic-
ular, how it had made them better able to advocate effectively in other
arenas of their lives. While there were some differences with the the-
ater program at Attainment High created by socioeconomic dispari-
ties— for example, the Attainment High students enjoyed full dinners
during tech week, paid for by the parents, whereas the debaters had gra-
nola bars and fruit during practice that were paid for by the organization
that sponsored their debate league— the core learning processes seemed
remarkably similar. In some ways, debate was a potentially even more
powerful vehicle than theater because in debate students could choose
their own words, and because the agency that students experienced in
debate was in sharp contrast to the very controlling atmosphere of their
high-poverty schools.
Athletics similarly possesses many of these same elements. There is
a clear purpose, an external audience, students choose to be there, they
build community, there are interdependent roles, they use minds and
bodies, there is a mixture of creative expression and disciplined prac-
tice, there is playing the whole game, it helps define individual and306
IN SEARCH OF DEEPER LEARNING
collective identity, and there are apprenticeship and mixed-aged group-
ings. A study that compared students' experiences in basketball practices
with the same students' experiences in math class found that "the prac-
tice of basketball supported deep engagement as players had greater ac-
cess to an understanding of the domain, were assigned and took up a
unique role that was integral to the practice, and had opportunities to
express themselves and feel competent," whereas math classes afforded
similar opportunities only for the most successful math learners.4 The
learning is less academic-in theater, newspaper, or debate there is a
more immediate connection to the kind of questions might one pursue
in school—but within what the domains offer, there is a thick and multi-
dimensional approach to learning it. 45
This research suggests that theater, debate, and by implication other
extracurriculars, bring together a powerful combination of purpose,
passion, and precision. They constitute their own, second, "grammar
of schooling," one that sits in plain sight right alongside the grammar
that governs most of the nation's core academic classes. This second
grammar embodies a very different set of principles than the first, by
emphasizing
• students as active producers rather than passive recipients
• learning by doing rather than by transmission
• clear purposes and external audiences rather than simply
working to please the teacher
• multi-age groupings rather than age-graded classrooms
• integration of students with different skill levels rather than
tracking, and
• learning through apprenticeship rather than didactic instruction
Extracurriculars, in other words, are not just fun and engaging, but also
highly aligned with a powerful mode of learning.
To be sure, extracurriculars benefit to some degree from their spe-
cial circumstances. The fact that they are chosen is critical to their suc-
cess, because such choice is important for building communities of
mutual interest. Extracurriculars also benefit from being shielded from
some of the constraints of the core curriculum; there are no expecta-DEEPER LEARNING AT THE MARGINS
307
tions for what should be taught, the students are not tested on what they
learned (or didn't learn), and they have traditionally been free of at least
some of the pressure to attain a score or "win" that will help a student
get into college. These characteristics enable the learning to follow the
natural rhythms of their subjects, and they free students from the in-
strumental mindset—is this going to be on the test?— that is so common
in the more conventional part of school.46
At the same time, there are ways to inject more of these qualities into
the traditionally academic part of the curriculum. Elective classes, as
we have seen, also enable student choice and the formation of commu-
nities of interest in a particular subject, but within the academic cur-
riculum. Electives in certain domains, like English, can be normed, so
that while students have choice about which content they read, the core
skills are common across the domains. Courses can also be pitched in
ways that are much clearer about their purposes, and students can
produce final products that are connected to real-world domains.
Thus, rather than focusing on the ways in which extracurriculars are
structurally special, perhaps we should think more about whether there
are ways to engender some of the same qualities of learning in core
classes. There is much that the periphery can teach the core, if only we
open ourselves to the possibilities created by this second grammar of
schooling.