DREW BOYD ANT
JACOB GOLDENBE
INSIDE THE
A Proven System of Cre
for Breakthrough Re:
SIMON & SCHUSTER PAPER
NEW YORK
LONDON
TORONTO SYDNEDIVIDE AND CONQUER:
THE DIVISION TECHNIQUE
Life proceeds not by the association and addition of elements, but by
dissociation and division.
-Henri Bergson, philosopher
Have you noticed how different your favorite band sounds in a live con-
cert compared with a digital recording? Yes, seeing Eric Clapton onstage
is a sublime experience. But his live rendition of "Layla" doesn't have
quite the same feel as the original 1970 recorded version you listen to
with your iPod. When he sings it live, the song comes out... imperfect.
If you were lucky enough to hear Clapton perform "Layla" six different
times over the past forty years, you would have heard six different ver-
sions of the song. Some may have been electrifying, others perhaps disap-
pointing. You expect that. You buy a concert ticket and take your chances
on what happens onstage that particular night. But however "on" Clapton
is, he can never exactly duplicate the original studio recording, in which
every instrumental and vocal note was sung in tune, in time, and in sync.
As most people know, great studio recordings aren't (usually) cre-
ated on a first take. Or a second. Or, sometimes, even a thirtieth. Record
producers keep recording until they like what they hear.
Recordings also differ from live performances in that members of a
musical ensemble don't always play together to create the final sound
you hear. Each separate part of a song can be recorded by itself. The
70 B
lead guitarist, the percussionist, the bass guitar
can each get his own time alone in the studio t
or individual streams of sound, on magnetic ta
produce the complete song, recording engine
bine all the tracks. A song can have four, sixt
different tracks. Each track is rehearsed repe
independently. Only when every track has bee
they all "mixed" into the final recording.
In hindsight, the idea of creating and then
of music to achieve the highest possible qual
Without this innovation, musicians had to p
over (and over again) until they all got it perfe
cian made a mistake, they all had to start over
Obviously, this was hugely time consuming
consider all the wasted media.
Lester William Polsfuss changed all that. B
Wisconsin, Polsfuss was a natural inventor. A
hood, he built a crystal radio from scratch so
constantly. Later, because he wanted to play br
guitar at the same time, he invented the necl
which many prominent musicians-most not
today. At age thirteen, performing in a count
a phonograph needle to a radio speaker to :
acoustic guitar so that he could be heard over
You'd probably recognize Polsfuss's stag
nowned jazz and country music guitarist al
recognized for his significant contributions to
solid-body electric guitar, which created a fou
that has endured more than seventy years and
Rock and roll would have a different sound to
Known as the "Wizard of Waukesha," Pa
stantly inventing and innovating new music:
In 1948 his friend and collaborator Bing Crc
commercially manufactured reel-to-reel tape72 • INSIDE THE BOX
the manufacturing line of the San Carlos, California-based recording
pioneer Ampex. Paul had been experimenting since the 1930s with
what he called "multitrack"
recordings, where he would record him-
self playing guitar duets with himself. But the recording media of the
time--acetate discs-did not lend themselves to this recording tech-
nique. To get a recording he was satisfied with, he'd have to burn
through five hundred or more discs.
Paul immediately saw possibilities in the Ampex model 200. By
installing another recording head on the device, he could record himself
playing lead guitar, add harmony on top of it, and then add vocals on
top of that. By mixing the tracks together, he was able to fully leverage
the entire width of quarter-inch tape. After a few days of experimenting
with the device in his garage, Paul released "Lover (When You're Near
Me)," featuring himself playing eight different electric guitar parts. The
recording industry went wild. Although not the first to use this tech-
nique (called overdubbing), Paul proved that it was both a musically
and a financially advantageous technique for producing popular songs
and movie soundtracks. Paul ignited a fire that revolutionized both the
film and the music businesses.
DIVISION IN THE CLOSED WORLD
Paul's inventiveness provides a perfect example of our next creativity
tool: Division. Like the other techniques in our book, Division helps
you find creative solutions by narrowing, or constraining, your possible
options. In this case, you do this by dividing an existing feature or ele-
ment into multiple parts. Then you reconfigure the elements in a novel
way, and proceed to consider the possibilities and benefits that the new
configuration offers.
You can see how Division works in multitrack recordings. Paul split
music recordings into smaller, individual, and more easily managed
units. By doing this, he vastly expanded the horizons of musicians of all
types and in all genres, providing them with tools that supplied flexibil-
ity and freedom in which they could create, innovate, enhance, and sell
the fruits of their talents in ways that previous generations could never
have imagined.
Today musicians record both instrumer
individual tracks so they can access, process
way they choose. Whereas the original goal
formance was to capture the experience anc
people not fortunate enough to be present
cians use multitrack techniques for a variety
reasons. Many simply want to eliminate the
occur in live performances. Others strive fo
verb and phasing. Still others may want to u
to remix a whole new version of a song lat
ated tracks.
The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inducte
he was inducted into the National Inventor
tribution to the development of the solid-br
two years before he died at age ninety-for
Medal of Arts, the highest honor given to
ment.
Musicians of all ages and stripes revere
Van Halen once told him, "Without the thir
be able to do half the things I do." Led Zer
Paul, "He's the man who started everything
visionary as one of our latter-day innovators,
Audio Engineering Society in the mid-1950
we'll have a machine that you carry in yo
parts and that has every song you ever want
The audience roared with laughter.
HOW THE DIVISION TECHNIQUE WORKS
By dividing an existing object or service i
arranging those parts into something new,
one of two things. Either we get a new ben
existing benefit delivered in a novel way.
Remember our previous discussion of !
sion helps us overcome the limitations imp
call, Structural Fixedness refers to our tend74 • INSIDE THE BOX
or systems can be made (structured) only as they have traditionally
been made. We're used to perceiving them as "whole" units, and we
expect them to retain that familiar structure. When we see something
that deviates from the familiar structure, we're troubled. Instinctively,
we conclude that something is wrong.
Structural Fixedness handicaps us. Rather than see the benefits of a
new (and odd) configuration of a familiar object, we try instead to rec-
oncile the strange configuration with what we know and mentally "fix
it" by putting it back in its original form. We waste time and energy put-
ting things in what we think are their rightful order rather than stretch-
ing our imagination to new possibilities.
Imagine grabbing a flashlight only to find that the head of the flash-
light has broken off. Your first reaction is probably that the flashlight
is ruined and needs to be thrown away. But wait. Stop and mull over
the possibilities for a minute, and you might be able to imagine ways
that the new flashlight "configuration" might be useful. Perhaps the
head of the flashlight could become a spotlight that sticks to the wall
and is activated remotely by the handheld piece. Or it could become
a headlamp on a construction hard hat. The key is to let the Division
technique break the chains of Structural Fixedness so that you can see
new potential benefits.
You can apply Division in three different ways:
= Functional Division. You carve out specific functions of a product and
position them somewhere else.
• Physical Division. You cut a product into pieces along any random physical
line.
• Preserving Division. You divide a product into smaller versions of itself.
After you divide an object using one of these approaches, you can
then rearrange the divided parts. When rearranging, you can do so in
one of two ways: in space (where the object is located in relation to the
others) or in time (when the object is present in relation to the others).
Changing the relationships between the parts changes your perspec-
tive, and opens up completely new possibiliti
product.
FUNCTIONAL DIVISION
One way to deploy Division is by focusing c
ity. You do this by first identifying the com
specific aspect of the product's usefulness. I
of the product and move it somewhere else. (
not removed completely. Otherwise you wor
tion technique) Take an air conditioner as :
air-conditioning units contained all necessary
box: the thermostat, the fan, the cooling unit.
in this single box configuration, there wasn't
novate except to improve the motor or oth
once "Functional Division" was applied, some i
started appearing. If you divide the motor f
conditioning mechanisms and place it somew
house-suddenly you reduce the loud noise an
also eliminate the need to block a window or t
a home's exterior wall. The motor hums away
is forced through narrow tubing that enters th
the wall and into the home's ventilation syste
the thermostat is divided from the air-conditi
separated, the thermostat can be brought insi
can quickly and easily adjust the temperature
convenient location.
You're also benefiting from Functional Divi
up the remote control for your TV. Controls
nel, adjusting the volume, and switching back
cable and DVD player have all been divided fr
placed in an object you can hold in the palm of
divided and rearranged in space (a new locatio
The idea of remote control can be ext
conditioning example. Instead of having the the76 • INSIDE THE BOX
ine moving it to a remote control that contains both the controls and
the temperature sensor. Now the unit responds to changes in tempera-
ture where it matters most: from where you are sitting.
Many airlines have divided the functions of the check-in process to
make it more convenient for travelers and to save themselves money.
Passengers can print out their boarding passes at home. They can check
in their luggage the day before the flight and at a location other than
the airport. Here you see Functional Division in both space and time.
Many companies have used Functional Division to make their
products easier to clean or maintain. In fact, engineers and designers the
world over find Functional Division especially useful when seeking to
make products more user friendly.
For example, vacuum cleaners with removable dirt collection bags
allow consumers to discard more easily the debris sucked up by the
machines. The laptop you carry is smaller and lighter due to Functional
Division, because manufacturers divided the functions such as the hard
drive, DVD drive, and video card into separate units. This allows you to
plug them in only when you need them.
Manufacturers of epoxy glue use Functional Division to enhance
the usefulness of their products. Typically, glue is a mixture of resin—
the sticky component-and a hardener that causes the resin to set and
hold things together. Both ingredients are usually premixed in a single
container, so that if you want to glue two pieces of wood together, you
simply squirt it on one of the pieces, and then press the two pieces
together and hold them until they adhere. Now imagine dividing each
function-the sticky resin and the hardener-to create a new product.
You'd have epoxy. Epoxy is a uniquely strong adhesive that keeps the
resin and hardener apart until the consumer is ready to glue something
together. One reason for epoxy's popularity is that consumers can con-
trol the length of time the glue takes to "cure" by putting in more or less
hardener when mixing it. By packaging the resin and the hardener sepa-
rately, manufacturers provided consumers with a more useful product.
Early shampoos had both cleansing agents and conditioners mixed
together in one bottle. By functionally dividing shampoo into separate
cleansing and conditioner bottles, manufac
more choice about how to use the produc
tioner to apply.
Some beverage makers have divided the
that can be added to plain milk to give it th
late and strawberry, and placed the flavorings
straw. Each straw includes tiny beads in a va
When you insert the straw into the milk and
the flavors and colors are unleashed. Parents 1
convince their children to drink more milk.
PHYSICAL DIVISION
With "Physical Division," you physically divid
a product along any random physical line. We
using a hacksaw to cut through the product
way. By dissecting the original product alor
arranging the pieces, we open our eyes to pote
ample, by cutting up a picture or photograph i
pieces, you get a wonderful game that can 1
alike happy for hours: a picture jigsaw puzzle.
Early submarines had only one compartm
larger and safer because of Physical Division
is compartmentalized into cells to prevent 1
(machinery, ammunition, staff) are protected
are locked when needed to prevent the spreac
water, or smoke from cell to cell.
Traffic authorities in Kiev, Ukraine, have a
parking fines. If your car is illegally parked, the
cense plate and keep it until you pay.
The sports drink manufacturer Viz Enterr
bottles into two compartments that keep the vi
arate from the rest of the liquid. You add them
consuming it by twisting the cap. It's called the
vitamins at optimal potency until you are ready78 & INSIDE THE BOX
PRESERVING DIVISION
You can frequently make groundbreaking innovations simply by di-
viding a product into "chunks" to create many smaller versions of it.
These smaller versions still function like the original product, but their
reduced size delivers benefits that users wouldn't get with the larger,
"parent" product. This is "Preserving Division."
Les Paul used Preserving Division to produce his multitrack record-
ing by taking a single medium—a tape-and dividing it into multiple
smaller tracks that perform the same function as the original large piece
of tape.
We see this all the time in the technology industry. For years, com-
puter makers kept increasing the capacity of hard drives (the devices
within PCs on which programs and data are stored). Then an engineer
had a brilliant idea: to use Preserving Division to create mini personal
storage devices. Today many people won't leave their desks without
placing their "thumb" drives in their briefcase or pocket. These mini
storage units are designed specifically for people who must carry elec-
tronic versions of documents with them but don't want to be burdened
with laptops or other computing devices. They simply transfer docu-
ments from their PCs to their thumb drives, and walk away from the
computer.
Many food manufacturers use the Preserving Division technique to
create more convenient versions of popular products. By taking a regu-
lar serving or portion of a product and dividing it into multiple smaller
portions, manufacturers allow consumers to purchase food products in
more convenient and cost-effective ways. Consumers buy only what
they need instead of a larger amount. Recently, manufacturers have
even used Preserving Division to help people curb their calorie intake
by providing popular snacks in smaller, more diet-friendly packages.
Kraft Foods's Philadelphia Cream Cheese brand does this by offering
individually wrapped single-serving-size portions of its flagship product
for people to put in their brown-bag lunches or take to the office with
a breakfast bagel.
The time-sharing arrangements that many hotels and condomini-
ums offer provide more examples of Preservis
sharing, a year of "ownership" of a property
smaller units of a week each. Each unit is then
who has the right to live in the property for
unit preserves the characteristics of the who
divided over time.
Likewise, when you make payments on a lo
amounts of money created by dividing the lar
the loan. As with the time-sharing condos, the
When doctors treat cancer tumors with
have to be sure to kill the cancer tissue withor
age to the surrounding healthy tissue. How? TI
of radiation into smaller, less lethal doses and
from many different angles. The smaller beams
divided in space, converge to hit the cancer ce
of any one beam does not do enough damage to
along the way.
USING DIVISION WITH SERVICES AND OTHER "INTANGIE
All these Division techniques can also be used t
services and processes--as well as products. In
this is the most common use of the technique.
Think about your traditional telephone servi
bile phone). The typical way to sign up for, use, ar
involved six basic steps, which had to be perform
1. You chose a telecom provider.
2. You filled out the application and chose the approp
needs and budget.
3. You used the phone to make calls.
4. At the end of the month, you received a bill covering
that time period.
5. You paid your bill.
6. You started the process over again from step 3.80 • INSIDE THE BOX
Can you think of a lucrative new service you could create simply by
dividing these steps and moving them around? If you'd used Division
to do this before the Houston Cellular Telephone Company (HCTC)
did in the early 1990s, you would have scored big. That's when HCTC
released the first commercial prepaid mobile phone card. To create this
product, HCTC merely took step 5, "You paid your bill," and made it
step 1. Voilà! An innovative new mobile service for people with short-
term mobile communications needs. This is an example of Functional
Division with the functions rearranged in time.
Here's a useful tip to help you get the most out of the Division
technique for services and processes. Write down the service or process
steps on Post-it notes, one step on each note. Stick the notes onto a
wall. First, arrange the steps in their conventional order. This way, you
acknowledge your attachment to both the Structural Fixedness and
the Functional Fixedness of the original process before you attempt
to break that attachment. Then randomly pull one of the Post-it notes
off the wall. With your eyes closed, stick it back on the wall. (In the
unlikely event that you inadvertently put it back in its original location,
try again.) Open your eyes and visualize the new configuration. Create
a mental picture of it. Now, with the new ordering of the service or pro-
cess steps, ask yourself what possible benefit could come of the change.
DIVISION IN THE REAL WORLD
Division is a versatile tool that you can use across a wide range of sce-
narios. You'll find this technique especially useful for complex services
that involve a lot of steps or components. It is also helpful to create
innovations in processes such as manufacturing production lines or
employee recruiting. As with other tools, it helps break our Structural
Fixedness, especially with systems that have been around a long time.
Here are some examples of how Division was used to solve real-world
challenges.
EXPERIENCE IS THE BEST TEACHER (DREW'S STORY)
Many people have trouble accepting the idea that we can innovate sys-
tematically. They cling to the belief that only very gifted individuals can
make truly inspired leaps and startling bre:
ments are the domain of creative geniuses an
of us ordinary mortals, they insist. Most ref
them about the method-until they experi
they become true believers.
One of my favorite "conversion" stories
eral Electric (GE) invited me to speak at its
facility-the John F. Welch Leadership Cen
York.
Crotonville is the center of GE's strong
of the first of its kind in the world, the can
world's brightest and most influential minds it
ness. For thousands of GE employees, attend
ville is a defining moment in their career.
I'd been invited to teach a half-day progra
senior GE marketers. These men and women I
an advanced two-week development progras
most talented marketing professionals in its gl
Halfway through the program, a particip
been sitting quietly, listening with his arms fo
slightly to the side. He had "that look" of sor
that anyone could innovate methodically. 1
his cynicism with facial expressions and boc
of hours. Now he was about to speak. "Okas
have successfully used this method at J&J. I s
medical devices, and perhaps on consumer pro
makes," he said. He wasn't being impolite. "I
One big question." He paused. You could hear
ally saying it would work on GE products?"
After he finished speaking, total silence. "
participants began chiming in: "Good question
products?" Heads nodded. People who had ber
sat up straight. Others began interrupting, talk
voices heard. "Seems improbable." "Our proc
"Our markets are saturated." All hell had broke82 • INSIDE THE BOX
I was taken aback. I had been doing these workshops long enough
to expect the moment when the audience tries to "stump the speaker."
I even looked forward to that moment. It usually signals a turning point
in the workshop, where participants feel comfortable enough to speak
their minds. They start asking really good questions-and give me the
opportunity to present my strongest evidence and make my most force-
ful arguments. But something was different this time. This didn't feel
like the usual friendly give-and-take in a corporate seminar. It felt like
a flat-out challenge. These people were serious. If I couldn't prove to
them here and now that our method could work at GE, the show was
over.
I have a simple rule to follow in confrontational situations: Don't
back down, but don't bluff or get defensive.
So I said simply, "I honestly don't know if it will work here. Let's
find out."
I spoke calmly, but inwardly I was feeling challenged. The atmo-
sphere was decidedly charged. The plush conference room full of polite
corporate marketers dressed in casual business attire could well have
been the Roman Colosseum filled with a bloodthirsty toga-clad mob.
When I first told this story to Jacob, my coauthor, he expressed his
relief that he'd never been put on the spot like this. "We academic lab
rats' aren't good at street fighting," he said. "My theories wouldn't have
satisfied your audience." He was right.
With adrenaline pumping and my blood pressure higher than was
healthy, I thought quickly before choosing Division as my best weapon.
It would allow me to quickly and effectively prove that creativity could
be harnessed as systematically as an Excel spreadsheet. Or so I hoped.
I faced the first man who had spoken up. "Pick any GE product," I
instructed him. He thought for a minute. I swallowed as I considered
which of the thousands of GE products he might choose. An aircraft
engine? Electric generator? Lightbulb? He chose none of the above.
"Refrigerator," he said slowly, and smiled.
The crowd went wild. "Yeah! Refrigerator!" "Right! Make a better
fridge!" My heart sank. The refrigerator market was utterly mature. The
"cooling box" had been around since approximately 1000 B.c., when it
was invented by the Egyptians. True, manufa
some improvements over the years, but the ba
since the introduction of electricity. Sales wer
vation was long gone from that market segme
anything about the kitchen appliance market
anytime soon. Clearly, I was toast. I could se
room that everyone agreed with my private as
I asked the audience to call out the com
As they did, I wrote down each one on my flip
"Fan!" "Lightbulb?" "Ice maker!" "Compressor!
a dozen components on the chart by the time
ing out. I then asked the same man-the ori
any component for me to demonstrate Divis
pick the lightbulb, given GE's long history of r
Wrong again.
"Compressor!"
The class laughed. They were enjoying thi
you divide and rearrange the most essential p
still have a viable product? What possible purp
I remained calm and kept the discussion go
sor," I said. "Let's take the compressor and its f
unit and place it somewhere that's within the
actually in the refrigerator anymore. Where cou
The room fell silent as all the participants
them credit: They were trying. Yes, they expecte
But they wanted to defeat me honestly. At long
rear of the room spoke up. "You could put it
house."
I grabbed this lifeline. "Okay! Let's mentally
figuration. Based on the theory that function f
out why this could be beneficial. Who would
erator attractive? What would the benefits be?
thinking of benefits. We don't have to resolve
point."
I noticed that formerly mocking faces now84 • INSIDE THE BOX
them. Some people were scribbling on notepads. No one was smirking
anymore or exchanging sly glances with his or her neighbors. Instead, I
was looking at a group of intellectually curious, engaged professionals. A
young man, clearly the most junior in the room, offered an idea: "With
the compressor outside, the kitchen would be a lot quieter." An older
woman jumped in: "It would generate less heat in the kitchen." Another
said, "Servicing the unit would be much easier if the compressor were
outside. The customer wouldn't have to be home." Then another spoke
up: "You'd have more storage space in the refrigerator itself."
At last, someone hit pay dirt. "Hey, I know!" came a voice I hadn't
heard before. A reticent-looking man with glasses raised his hand. "You
could use the compressor to cool more than just the food in the main
refrigerator."
I leapt on that idea. "Such as what?" I asked. The man shrank back a
bit but answered bravely, "You could divide the entire refrigerator into
multiple smaller cooling boxes throughout the kitchen. Perhaps part of
the pantry could be refrigerated."
"Perhaps you could create small cooling drawers to hold items like
eggs," said the older woman.
"Maybe you could build a vegetable cabinet or a beverage unit that
made it easier to grab a cold drink," said the man with glasses. "You
could customize the entire kitchen around refrigeration. You wouldn't
have just one cooling storage unit, but lots of smaller ones that were
integrated with other appliances."
I was impressed. What had started as Functional Division of the com-
pressor leapt quickly to Physical Division of the main refrigerator box.
The group was on a roll. I stopped trying to direct the conversation.
"You have a whole new business model for your appliance division."
"We could sell this to developers constructing new housing." "This could
totally disrupt the industry. We'd jump-start a new growth cycle for our
business." "If our engineers could pull this off," someone warned. But
no one was listening. Everyone had more ideas to contribute. Even the
original cynical man was smiling and offering comments.
I sat down and wiped my brow, relieved. With the time for my ses-
sion almost up, I could grab a cup of coffee du
press. Then I noticed a woman at the very back
said anything. But her notebook was open in t
see that she'd taken copious notes. As I watch
and started scribbling more. I approached her. "
asked. She looked up and smiled. "I work in Gl
she said. "I heard a lot of interesting things here
Several years later, kitchens with separate
the main refrigerator unit began appearing or
GE's Hotpoint line of drawer appliances. I can'
knows? We've seen this concept expand to enc
ing drawers outside the main oven unit as well, :
an extraordinarily convenient tool for busy chef:
The Crotonville visit was the first of many
future GE leaders. But this first one taught me
need to see this new innovation methodology
their own products or processes, to really believe
Figure 3.1
FRUITS & VEGETATES
SODA BEY86
• INSIDE THE BOX
FRIENDSHIPS, HAPPILY DIVIDED
For those wondering, I set most of my content on my personal Face-
book page to be open so people could see it. I set some of my content
to be more private, but I didn't see a need to limit visibility of pics
with my friends, family, or my teddy bear :)
This December 2009 posting on Facebook is not the confession of a
young schoolgirl. It is by Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg, cofounder and
principal architect of the giant social network. Like everyone else in the
world, Zuckerberg treats different friends differently. Even his teddy
bear has special status-as it should. After all, how we form friendships
affects every part of our lives. Life would be hard without friends. Our
friendships shape our personal identity.
But although Facebook is all about friends, it has a unique view of
what that means. At the 2008 Facebook Developer Conference (an an-
nual forum for independent Facebook programmers), Zuckerberg said,
"In the world we're building, where the world is more transparent, it
becomes good for people to be good to each other. That's really impor-
tant as we try to solve some of the world's problems."
Zuckerberg believes in radical transparency. "Facebook is philosoph-
ically run by people who are extremists about information sharing."
According to Zuckerberg, Facebook's goal is to make the world more
open, connected, and transparent. He believes that improving commu-
nication by making it more efficient will make the world a better place
He created Facebook so that people could bring all their friends from
all parts of their lives into one digital space.
But this is not how life works. Each friendship is unique. In fact,
friendships differ so much from one another that it actually is unnatural
to force them together into a single big open and transparent digital
space. You would invite some friends to your home for a dinner party
You'd ask others to bring their spouses and significant others and kids te
a picnic in the park. Others you would take great care to keep separate
from one another. This is completely natural. People have always orga-
nized their friends into groups. We have friend
childhood. Friends from school.
Friendships also change with age. In our wo
with partners, have children, and make friends v
children. As we grow older, friendships become
As spouses and relatives die, friends play critical
Yet despite these vast differences in our frie
motes transparency across all of them. Unless yo
all your friends on Facebook see what all the other
also encourages us to continuously make new fri
we add to Facebook, the more valuable our Faceb
This, too, differs from the so-called real worl
many friends. Humans possess a limited amoun
emotional "fuel" needed to maintain friendships.
the quality of those friendships suffers.
The British anthropologist Robin Dunbar a
a way to calculate the optimal number of frien
that "this limit is a direct function of relative ne
this in turn limits group size." His "Dunbar num
as the maximum number of individuals with wh
sonal relationship can be maintained, and falls son
and 230 (although 150 is commonly cited as the
of Facebook's 750 million users have more frier
number advises. And, indeed, research tells us ti
Facebook friends causes problems.
A case in point: because Facebook friends are
users often experience negative feelings after parti
discussions. Eighty-five percent of women say th
book friends annoy them at times. Common compl
use Facebook to brag and "overshare." Facebook p
concur that too many people complain, share
views, or boast about seemingly perfect lives. And :
friends too easily and frequently turn into "frenemi
Search giant Google, ever vigilant for seizi88 • INSIDE THE BOX
Figure 3.2
HOST
WIFEE
KID -
FAMILY
KID
COLLEGE
NEICHBORS
noticed this. Although late to the social-networking game, Google's
Google Plus service, launched in June 2011, offered a distinct advantage
over Facebook by allowing users to divide their friends into different
social circles, just as they do in real life.
A day after launch, Google had to temporarily suspend new signups
for Google Plus because of excessive demand, and within three weeks,
it had signed up more than 10 million users. It reached 400 million
users within a year.
Google is attracting all these members by using what you should
recognize as Functional Division. By assuming that each of your friends
has a specific function (is a specific type of friend), Google Plus sepa-
rates that function from the whole (your entire population of friends).
Through a feature called Google Circles, users can divide friends into
relevant groups and manage their online relationships much more ef-
fectively. Google Circles even manages to make all this fun—and the
results are visually very pleasing.
Soon after Google Circles debuted, Facebook announced a strategic
advance that signaled a radical new way of managing Facebook friends
Guess what it was? Yes, Facebook's new "Smart Lists" feature mirrored
Google Circles almost point for point. By provi
with a way to divide their friends into categories
idea that we prefer to manage our online friendshi
do our real-life ones. Google Plus has a long way
Facebook in terms of members. But the rapid-fire
book seems to indicate that Google's clever innova
sion pattern struck a nerve.
REINVENTING THE INSURANCE FORM
What is the worst form you ever had to fill out? A
A loan application? For many people, the dreaded ir
form trumps them all.
One would think that after all these years, i
would figure out a way to make their applications eas
they have made forms easier in many ways. But the
regulated by governments to make sure that people u
they are getting when they apply for insurance. Bec
complicated, and people still make mistakes when fill
Each of the many pages has to be completed ir
with all the correct information inserted. Otherwise i
surance industry has a term for it: "not in good order,"
This form is a legal contract, so it is understand
companies have to be so rigid. Industry legal revie
rigorous when reviewing these forms to ensure that
regulatory compliance. Thus, even one small error wi
to bounce an applicant.
Insurance company AXA Equitable was as frust
peers over this issue. The industry rate for rejecti
tions was approximately 50 percent-and AXA's ra
Imagine searching on Google Maps and knowing th
you received would be correct only half of the time.'
approaches, but none were getting us anywhere," se
AXA's senior vice president of retirement service
knowing you have a problem doesn't solve the probl
think you know the answer, but the problem keeps c90 • INSIDE THE BOX
Personally frustrated, the chairman of AXA Equitable challenged
his employees. "How can we improve our NIGO rate and still offer
great products and services to our customers?" He commissioned a
formal program to address this and other important issues within the
company. He wanted results-and he didn't want any of that "fluffy
brainstorming."
The company hosted an innovation workshop with a group of
hand-selected employees from different departments. At first, the em-
ployees were skeptical that Systematic Inventive Thinking could help
them solve such a long-standing problem. "We're going to teach you to
be innovative," SIT workshop leaders Yoni Stern and Hila Pelles told
them. The employees' reactions were typical: "I'm not creative! I'm
just an insurance analyst!" However, it didn't take long to change their
minds.
Using Division, the AXA employees created a rather surprising
component list. Taking the traditional insurance form, they imagined
every line on it as a separate component. Then, using Functional Divi-
sion, they imagined what would happen if they rearranged each step.
Why always fill out the name first, for example? As it turns out, there
is no reason why the applicant's name, address, date of birth, and all
the other usual personal data have to be first on the form, or, for that
matter, why it all has to be together. They were dividing and rearranging
through spaces (location on the form).
That's when the idea hit them. They thought, "Hey, if we can move
all these form parts around like a jigsaw puzzle, why not put them in
the order of how we actually collect the data?" It was brilliant. The
team thought about how a typical first meeting progresses between a
prospective client and an insurance agent. The agent learns about the
client and collects information in a way that differs dramatically from
how the form is laid out. Why not order the form that same way?
Once they "broke fixedness" around the age-old insurance form,
other insights came to light. They realized, for example, that some of
the items on the form could be "prepopulated"—meaning, filled in
before an agent even meets with the client. That saves time during
the call and, most important, is more accurate. (Think less NIGO!)
The team started looking at each part of the for
question: Who was best qualified to give the m
that part? Even more profoundly, the team reali
not have to be completed all at once. Using Divi
through-time," the team imagined a form filled
most appropriate person at the most appropriat
the final form has the correct information enterec
The team members had lots of other ideas ab
surance form, but they still faced a seemingly inst
Making real changes to the form wasn't really P
fort, and expense of getting a new form approved
regulator, not to mention the federal government
then, could they implement all these great ideas
insurance form? The answer was novel. They used
ency sheets that overlaid onto the insurance for
helped the agent know what parts needed to be
on the needs of the customer. The transparencies h
cific sections of the form that needed to be filled
navigate and fill out just what was needed, when it
ample, if a customer wanted a variable annuity, the
green-highlighted sections of the form. Easy!
Using the Division technique helped create a s
involve expensive technology or complicated proce
needed to see the problem in a new way.
"Using this systematic approach was like standi
Matterhorn near Zermatt, Switzerland, says Halin
vice president of innovation, research, and analytic
idly going from peak to peak and looking down at
valley. But each peak gives that same valley a comp
tive. The innovation techniques did the same thir
problem." Thanks to the Division technique, AXA
rate by 20 percent, saving itself hundreds of thousa
to mention the time savings for its customers.
"You don't have to work for a Silicon Valley com
Google to be innovative," Karachuk continues. "Insu92 • INSIDE THE BOX
ered an innovative industry, but we prove that wrong. It is empowering
to have a step-by-step approach to innovation that we can use anytime."
REINVENTING THE TRAINING PROCESS
Processes help us get things done. But what happens when your process
is too slow-when you have too many things to process and not enough
time? Division can help.
Consider training. Imagine that your company makes many com-
plex products in a variety of industries. Your salespeople must know
these products inside out. They also need to know how to most ef-
fectively sell them to target customers. As a result, your company
mandates that all new sales representatives must complete a six-week
training course.
But your company adds to its portfolio, on average, one new prod-
uct every month. How do you manage your training program in the
face of such rapid expansion? You can't add more time to the existing
program each month. After all, every minute that salespeople are in
training is a minute they aren't selling and aren't bringing in revenues.
Meet Lynn Noonan. A twenty-year veteran of health care giant
Johnson & Johnson (J&J), Lynn developed the sales training program
for more than one thousand J&J salespeople responsible for selling
complex medical instruments to surgeons worldwide. She had to fig-
ure out a way to continuously expand the number of products incor-
porated into the curriculum without increasing overall training time.
Lynn formed a cross-functional team of colleagues to solve the chal-
lenge. They used two different kinds of Division.
They used Functional Division to reengineer medical sales training.
They started (as we always recommend) by identifying all the compo-
nents in the training process. By doing this, Lynn realized that medical
training fell into one of three functional areas: anatomical, procedural;
and product-based training.
First, anatomical training. Traditionally, J&J sales reps learned about
basic human anatomy before anything else. This included organs such
as the gallbladder, a small sac that stores bile fluid produced by the liver
to aid digestion. Reps needed to understand
within the sac, causing blockage and pain, ar
tools can remove the gallbladder. The same is
structures such as the stomach, appendix, and
Next, they learned about common surgi
bariatric surgery used to treat morbid obesit
procedures used in treating intestinal cancer
for eliminating painful gallstones. Only after I
in both human anatomy and general surgical
people learn how each J&J product is used in
the world.
Lynn realized this was highly inefficient.
a thorough grounding in anatomy at the beg
training session, sales reps would need to be 1
learned when it was time to learn about speci
and yet again when instructors tied the proced
cal instruments and devices that J&J manufact
Lynn's team divided each of these three fr
cal, procedural, product-based) into its small
they separated the entire course of anatomis
body parts: lung, stomach, spine, gallbladder,
procedural training into bariatric surgery, bowe
surgery, and all other relevant procedures. An
huge bulk of product training into product-cer
vidual modules devoted to J&J's key surgical pr
hundreds of other J&J medical devices and inst
Lynn's team then organized these function
three. Each anatomy lesson was coupled with ti
cific surgical procedure and delivered along witi
J&J product used in that procedure. (See figure
By using Functional Division in this way, L
formed J&J training into a much more efficier
dents received anatomical and procedural trai
basis. As Lynn puts it, "Students get their ana94 • INSIDE THE BOX
Figure 3.3
Complete
Book of
Complete
Book of
Surgical
Mae me her
Complete
Book of
Surgical
Procedures
Book of
Stomach
Surgery
training right when they require it: when learning about a specific J&J
product." The new approach cut the need for refresher courses.
Lynn and the team not only made training more efficient; they dra-
matically improved overall quality. By presenting information from the
perspective of customers (surgeons and other health care professionals),
they enabled salespeople to better understand how J&J products fit within
the medical ecosystem to help achieve successful patient outcomes.
But they did not stop with this single success. They then used Divi-
sion to rearrange the six-week training program into smaller segments
consisting of just a few days each. They spread those segments over a
twelve-month period (an example of rearranging through time). By get-
ting out into the field sooner, J&J sales reps began learning the realities
of the actual marketplace from the day they were hired. Rather than
attempting to absorb large amounts of information that would remain
abstract until they applied it in the field, salespeople accelerated their
development of all-important "street smarts" By the time they entered
the classroom, they had a much better idea of what customers wanted
and needed. The training material made a lot more sense, and as a re-
sult, training became more memorable-and effective.
HOW TO USE DIVISION
To get the most out of the Division technique,
1. List the product's or service's internal compone
2. Divide the product or service in one of three wa
a. Functional (take a component and rearrang
pears).
b. Physical (cut the product or one of its com
line and rearrange it).
c. Preserving (divide the product or service int
piece still possessing all the characteristics
3. Visualize the new (or changed) product or servic
4. Ask: What are the potential benefits, markets, ar
this, and why would they find it valuable? If you
cific problem, how can it help address that parti
5. If you decide you have a new product or servic
then ask: Is it feasible? Can you actually creat
form this new service? Why or why not? Can you
make it more viable?
Keep in mind that you don't have to use al
but you boost your chance of scoring a breakth
COMMON PITFALLS IN USING DIVISION
• Rearrange divided components in both space an
components of a product, process, or service, r
back into the Closed World in both space and tim
you would place the divided component in some n
as putting the refrigerator compressor outside the h
you would consider ways to rearrange the produ
divided component "appears" at different times fi
stays in the same physical location but is there on
sharing condominiums are one example of dividing
• Notice how starting with a component list is a fo
ing the creative process with a component list hel96 • INSIDE THE BOX
in a new light. It breaks both Structural Fixedness (you now see your whole
situation as a collection of smaller pieces) and Functional Fixedness (as
you are forced to see each component as a separate entity and ponder its
role). Remember the tip about writing components on Post-it notes? This
helps us "take the thumbtacks out of the box," as in Duncker's experiment.
• Change "resolution" if you are having trouble. If rearranging components in
the Closed World seems odd or difficult, you may need to change your com-
ponent list. You can do this using what we call "Resolution." Think of Resolu-
tion as your distance from the Closed World. By zooming in, you can examine
something close up and see its individual parts and components in great
detail. Alternatively, you can "zoom out" to view how an object exists within a
larger context. By making your Closed World smaller or larger, you can adjust
your list of components to come up with a better Division-inspired innovation.
Here's how "Resolution" works: imagine sitting in your living room. You
can see the furniture, the light fixtures, the windows, the floor, and the paint-
ings hanging on the walls. By applying Division here you would consider
separating or dividing these "components" from one another or from the
room as a whole. Now zoom in on one of these components-say, the light-
ing fixture hanging from the ceiling. Make that, rather than the entire living
room, your Closed World. Identify the individual components: The lightbulb.
The chain that attaches the fixture to the ceiling. The on-off switch. Consider
how you might use Division with these.
Finally, trying zooming out from the living room so that your Closed
World includes all the homes in your neighborhood. What components do
you see? Individual houses? Cars? Fire hydrants? Sidewalks? Trees? How
could these components be divided in a way that adds value?
DIVIDE AND CONQUER
Division is a natural part of the way we think. Like the other patterns,
it unlocks creative ideas within us by regulating and channeling our
thought processes. The key is to harness the pattern in a systematic way
using all three of the technique's versions. Division lets you conquer
tough problems by cutting them down to size.
4
BE FRUITFUL AND MU
THE MULTIPLICATION TE
Opportunities multiply as they are seized.
"It will be a black cow in the middle of Chicago
architect Bruce Graham warned Gordon Met
Roebuck and Company. Metcalf wanted to l
scraper in downtown Chicago, an overpowering
of the Sears retail empire. Graham said no onc
wasn't objecting to the idea of a skyscraper pe
the fact that Metcalf's vision was so, well, bor
need another conventional skyscraper?
"As the largest retailer in the world, we thou
largest headquarters in the world," said Metcalf,
fice of such size and magnificence that the wor
applaud, much as it did when Graham unveile
story John Hancock Center building.
Yet constructing tall buildings is not technica
to overcome gravitational forces from the bu
selves. Then, once a building reaches a certain
consider the weight of those materials (called
as the weight of people and objects inside the b
taller the building, the heavier these combined l