DREW BOYD AN
JACOB GOLDENB
INSIDE THE
A Proven System of Cr
for Breakthrough Re
SIMON & SCHUSTER PAPE
NEW YORK
LONDON
TORONTO SYDNI2
WHEN LESS BECOMES MORE:
THE SUBTRACTION TECHNIQUE
A shortcut to riches is to subtract from our desires.
Petrarch (fourteenth-centur
talian scholar, poet, and humanist
AN EXPERIMENT IN INNOVATION (DREW'S STORY)
"I don't think we've nailed it yet." Mike Gustafson, the general manager
of Johnson & Johnson's fledgling anesthesia development program, was
lamenting delays in developing the prototype of a new sedation system.
Mike's team had spent the past two years designing the unit. Yet despite
its advanced features, Mike felt it lacked something. He was trying to
figure out how to increase the value of the unit and determine how
to charge for it. Would he simply charge customers an initial purchase
price for the new device? Or could he figure out a way to collect an
ongoing revenue stream?
Everyone agreed that the new sedation device was unique: When
patients could administer the drug themselves, it eliminated the need
for an anesthesiologist to oversee medical procedures requiring anesthe-
sia. Patients were given a small ball to hold and asked to slip on a pair
of headphones. An audio loop instructed them repeatedly to squeeze
the ball. Whenever patients were conscious enough to hear and under-
stand the recorded message, they squeezed the ball, which controlled
how much anesthesia they received. The machine allowed just the right
38 m
amount of anesthesia, based on a calculatio
weight and other factors. As patients went
received enough of the drug to have been
naturally stopped squeezing. This prevente
machine automatically detected and respon
by stopping or reducing the drug delivery
ing patients to take deep breaths. When the
off, and patients once again became conscio
they squeezed until they again lapsed into
system, called SEDASYS, would be the mo
chine in the industry. The team believed t
advisors agreed. It was unlike any machine c
Mike called me in June 2002 for advi
just learned about a new method of innovat
taught by Jacob. Though I hadn't met him,
he wrote about. I suggested to Mike that we
using the anesthesia prototype to experime
I needed to tread carefully. The previous inr
duced to J&J had been a resounding failure.
my colleague invest much time or money ir
basic field test. Mike agreed.
I invited a partner of Jacob's, Amnon
cilitate a one-day workshop with the pro
Amnon was CEO of Systematic Inventive T
We gathered a team of engineers and I
ence room. The atmosphere was not a proc
workshop participants were not very enthu
statement. Most were outright cynical. Som
worked for more than two years creating w
advanced prototype. Why waste a day "brai
device that was almost ready to manufacture
ing something that was already destined to t
Members of the team, like most engineers, '
nology they'd invented and certain about its40 • INSIDE THE BOX
the general manager who brought Amnon and me in, was responsible for
making sure the product met the company's financial expectations. He
was less convinced that the product was ready to market.
Amnon could sense the resistance in the relatively small room. The
body language was stiff and defiant: arms crossed, chins down, eyes
squinting. He first asked the team to list the prototype's major compo-
nents; this is the first step for each of the Systematic Inventive Thinking
techniques. The device resembled a large desktop PC, so it had similar
components: screen, keyboard, case, CPU, and power supply. Because of
government regulations, the device had to include a backup battery in
the event of a total power loss at the hospital. The team identified all of
these.
Amnon moved on to the next step. Arranging the group into teams
of two, he assigned each pair a component from the device. Then he
dropped the bombshell: "Your task," he said, "is to reimagine the device
without that component." You could tell from the looks on people's
faces that they thought this was going to be an utter waste of time.
Even I was skeptical, though I understood that we were about to apply
a specific SIT technique called Subtraction.
Subtraction is a way of exploring new configurations or taking
more innovative approaches to solving challenges. The technique is
simple: you mentally force out a component of the product or process
you're working with and imagine the remaining components existing
together "as is." The trick is to eliminate something previously thought
to be necessary-something you believe is so necessary that the product
couldn't work without it. Perhaps this sounds unrealistic, or even crazy,
but Mike's team was about to be surprised at how effective this tech-
nique can be. So was I.
Pointing at the first pair, Amnon said, "You two are assigned the
screen." He assigned the keyboard to the next pair, and the backup
battery to the third. "And the next group_" but Amnon was cut off.
The pair of engineers given the backup battery had had enough. They
had more important things to do back at the research facility, and they
weren't going to put up with this nonsense.
"Backup battery? You want to remove the backup battery from our
anesthesia machine? It is a violation of federa
without a backup battery. We'll go to jail!" It
participants started laughing.
I squirmed in my chair. We were at the
moment. If we could not prove that this innov
while immediately, we would lose the team-
again. This not only would put my career at 1
that I had let down my friend Mike.
Amnon persisted. "I know it seems strang
laborate with me and the method for the mom
the work." Amnon had a thick Israeli accent, a
meanor that relieved some of the tension in ti
at all concerned.
The engineers shot one another looks of s
vinced they had designed the most advanced al
planet. In both design and functionality, it wa
Lamborghini of anesthesia machines. And this
about to ruin their creation.
"I want you to imagine the unit without a
instructed. "Why would it be beneficial? Who
not about to let them bail out.
You could almost see the brains calculatin
gineers spoke up. "Okay," he said, "let's try this.
let's dismiss the workshop and see if we can g
today."
Amnon agreed, and the ideas started comi
Amnon's query about the value of a unit witho
that the unit would be lighter, cheaper, and 1
think of it, the backup battery takes up most o
said one engineer. "If you really could take out
wouldn't believe how incredibly simple this pr
agreed. They had never really thought about i
required, and that was that. But removing the 1
would make the machine less complex, easie
more mobile.42 • INSIDE THE BOX
Amnon moved quickly to the next phase. "Okay, so there are im-
portant benefits to taking out the battery. Good." He then explained
that if we had assured ourselves that in principle it would be benefi-
cial to subtract the battery, the Subtraction technique would then allow
us to replace the component we'd just taken out with another compo-
nent from within the Closed World. "What could you use within the
Closed World that could perform the function of backup power once
you took the battery out?" he asked.
As we discussed in chapter 1, the Closed World is an imaginary
place in space and time where all the elements (people and objects) are
within your reach or influence. In using a technique like Subtraction,
these "within reach" elements are your raw materials for innovation. In
this particular case, we define the Closed World as a hospital operat-
ing room where the unit is used. For example, all the equipment and
people you see in figure 2.1 could be "recruited" into our solution.
One of the engineers raised his hand hesitantly. Almost too embar-
rassed to speak, he finally got out his idea: "Maybe, you could hook up
our unit to the backup battery of another machine that's already in the
operating room. Perhaps the defibrillator?" Everyone turned and looked
at him. His voice grew excited. "We could install a lanyard from our de-
Figure 2.1
vice long enough and with the right conne
defibrillator unit. There is plenty of powe
if needed!" He picked up a pen and start
Others looked over his shoulder and bega
That's all it took. Suddenly the roon
was transformed from an unruly crowd
skeptics into a cohesive team of intereste
experienced as they were, they were surpr
idea of connecting their machine to anotl
have defibrillators (those machines with 1
tient suffering cardiac arrest), this was a to
• it hit them: this "methodology" might actu
Amnon wrote down all the ideas but
surprised by them. "Are there any obviou
work?" he asked. After a few comment
the team seemed pretty confident that, it
Amnon then moved to the next compo
screen? Why would it be beneficial to take
sia machine?"
The two engineers were reluctant to
But given what had just happened with
to push back too aggressively. One said ir
you must realize that we have spent tens
lecting 'voice of the customer' market rese
that, he continued, but also the team was
screen dramatically surpassed anything of
He ended with the clincher: "Doctors exp
to have screens. They would never trust a r
Definitely, ours needs to have a screen."
nized this statement for what it was: a sign
condition we will discuss later. The team u
sia machines with screens that it was near
without it.
Amnon conceded that the engineers
them to try the exercise. "Just as we did v44 • INSIDE THE BOX
let the methodology do the work. Admittedly, the screen is there for a
reason, and a perfectly valid one. But let's please just ask ourselves for
a moment: What would be or could be the benefits of producing this
exact same machine without a screen?"
They agreed to consider the possibility. "It would be lighter, cheaper,
less complex. It would be more mobile, and it would draw less power."
One of the marketers in the room chimed in, "It would be less dis-
tracting to physicians and other health care workers in the room. After
all, none of them really needs to look at it." She thought about it a little
more. Then she offered a provocative idea: "If you did take the screen
out, it would send a strong signal to the marketplace." When asked
what she meant, she explained,
"It would imply that our device is so
smart and intuitive that a screen isn't necessary. Doctors can rely on our
device completely without having to look at the screen to understand
what is happening with the patient. Without a screen, ours could be the
'intelligent anesthesia machine.' It would disrupt the industry!"
Lots of heads started nodding up and down. Mike was smiling.
Later he told me that this part of the discussion inspired thoughts of
taking a whole new approach to the project. Just discussing the screen
and backup battery opened up a host of new opportunities.
"Let's keep pushing," said Amnon. "What else in the Closed World
of the operating room could replace the function of the screen?"
"That's easy!" said one of the participants. "We could transmit
patient data from our machine to the operating room's primary moni-
tor. The doctor would be looking at that anyway." He was referring to
the fact that every operating room has a monitor that can display key
metrics about the procedure as well as images generated by specialized
equipment. For example, doctors frequently use medical cameras to
look inside patients' bodies, and the resulting images are displayed on
the primary monitor.
That a doctor could look at just one screen to see both internal im-
ages and the patient's anesthesia-related information (heart rate, blood
pressure, and so on) was a truly groundbreaking notion. I'd spent many
hours observing doctors perform surgery and seen firsthand how annoy-
ing it is to switch back and forth between different screens. Anything
capable of simplifying their lives delivered i
better quality of patient care and reduced c
Notice that we had progressed from si
mental improvements for a new medical di
that could have major implications for hou
keep in mind that these ideas all came fi
step: conceptually removing a few key con
had been considered nearly finished and re
ing to traditional standards.
Mike was grateful. Although he'd asked
project and had agreed to experiment with
ing, now his vision for the project had cha
one round and a few hours of work using
alone, Mike and his team came to a shockin
saw their prototype as perfect. They needed
they took the project back to the planning s
Two months after this one-day expe
conducted a full five-day new product d
employed Systematic Inventive Thinking.
system is now being used by doctors in Eur
to countries all over the world.
From a purely personal perspective, I l
tling effectiveness of Jacob's methodology. A
ning of what was to become a great friendsh
BLINDED BY FIXEDNESS
Subtraction works by eliminating an essent
(a product or process). The component to
internal component, meaning one that is
when you imagine eliminating the compon
components intact. This will seem strange at
a television set without a screen. Or visuali
filament. To make this conceptual leap, you
we all suffer from fixedness: the tendency to
tional way or use them as they have been tra46 • INSIDE THE BOX
Psychologist Karl Duncker discovered a version of fixedness called
"Functional Fixedness" when he posed his famous candle problem
(figure 2.2). In this classic experiment, Duncker sat participants down
at a table positioned against a wall. He gave each one a candle, a box of
thumbtacks, and a book of matches, and asked them to attach the can-
dle to the wall. Some participants tried pinning the candle directly to
the wall using the thumbtacks. Others attempted to stick the candle to
the wall using melted wax. Only a handful thought to use the thumb-
tack box. These few innovative thinkers tacked the box onto the wall,
effectively transforming it into a candleholder. Duncker realized that
participants were so fixated on the thumbtack box's traditional function
that they couldn't conceive of it as a possible solution to the problem.
Interestingly, in later experiments, participants presented with an empty
thumbtack box were twice as likely to solve Dunker's challenge as
those given a full one. Somehow, seeing the box out of context-that is,
not performing its usual function of holding thumbtacks—helped them
visualize it as a possible solution.
Through our facilitation of many innovation workshops, we ob-
served and defined another type of fixedness: structural. "Structural
Figure 2.2
Fixedness" is the inclination of humans to s
have trouble when an object has a part miss
a different-what we perceive as a "wrong".
YOU WANT TO TAKE OUT WHAT?
Notice in the story of the anesthesia machi
was removed, the team replaced it with son
erating room (the Closed World of that part
if you eliminated not just an essential feature
tion of the product? In other words, you s
For example, imagine taking the recording
recorder. Or perhaps taking the calling fun
Crazy? You won't think so after you read ab
ucts that were created by doing just those thi
Before CD players or MP3 players, you n
listened to music using another technology: t
this, Sony popularized its Walkman device in
vation, the Walkman can in effect be explaine
technique. Masaru Ibuka, Sony's cofounder,
listen to music when he traveled on long fligh
was too bulky to use on airplanes, so he aske
a playback-only stereo version that could be i
make it smaller, engineers stripped out the si
function of Sony's traditional cassette tape 1
placed the speakers, but the recording functio
truly subtracted.
Ibuka brought the prototype to Chairmar
it. So Sony's marketing department conducte
search to find out if others might too. The ma
No one could imagine wanting such a gad&
pressed on, and the rest is history. Walkman
introduced in Japan. Although Sony expected
units a month, again traditional business thir
The company sold fifty thousand Walkman48 • INSIDE THE BOX
months alone. It went on to sell more than two hundred million units
globally over the life of the product. Well before Apple's iPod, Sony's
Walkman fundamentally changed the way people listen to music.
Another successful product developed by removing a core function
from an existing brand is Motorola's cellular telephone Mango. The
story of the Mango is an example of a technologically simple product
that surprised everyone with its brilliant success.
The company's vice president of marketing in Israel created the
Mango as a way to compete with another company that had lower-
priced cell phones. To take cost out of his phones, he subtracted the
calling feature. That's right: a phone that could not make calls. It could
only receive calls. In doing so, he created a whole new communications
device for a market niche that possessed very special needs.
Who would want such a device? Think about parents of teenagers.
The Mango was a parent's dream come true. Without a calling feature,
kids could not run up high phone bills. They could still receive calls, so
parents still had a way to check up on them. The Mango was inexpen-
sive, so it wasn't a catastrophe if it was lost or stolen. And it didn't re-
quire a calling plan or monthly bill, because it only received calls. (Cell
phone customers in Israel are charged only for making calls, not receiv-
ing them.) Mangos were so simple that they were sold in supermarkets.
Creating this special phone for kids had an added benefit. The
company established a relationship with kids at an early age. Kids who
had Mangos as their first cell phones were more likely to become loyal
Motorola customers as they grew up.
Parents and kids were not the only ones who liked the Mango.
Businesses with field-based employees liked it too. Now companies
had a way to call their salespeople and delivery staff with a phone that
worked in only one direction: from the company to the employee. It
saved money and helped companies keep track of their employees.
Customers liked it too, as they were more likely to get through to a cell
phone that could not make calls.
The result was a tremendous success: in less than one year, more
than 5 percent of the market had purchased Mango devices. That year,
Israel was ranked the second-highest country in the world in terms of
cell phone penetration. The internationa
magazine chose the Mango as one of the t
ing strategies worldwide for 1995.
ADD AN EGG!
In the 1950s, General Mills launched a li
famous Betty Crocker brand. The cake mi
gredients in the package, plus milk and egg
needed was to add water, mix it all togeth
oven. For busy homemakers, it saved time al
virtually error free. General Mills had a sure
Or so it thought. Despite the many ber
did not sell well. Even the iconic and trustec
not convince homemakers to adopt the neu
General Mills brought in a team of ps
usual was going on. The company needed t
carefully if it was going to get this product
consumers resisting it?
The short answer: guilt. The psychol
erage American housewives felt bad usin
convenience. It saved so much time and e:
the traditional cake baking routine that th
ing their husbands and guests. In fact, the
people thought women were spending hours
getting more credit than they deserved. S
product.
General Mills had to act fast. Like most
nies, it might have considered an advertisin
guilt issue head-on, for example. Imagine a
plaining that saving time in the kitchen with
housewives to do other valuable things for tl
cials would show how smart it was to use suc
Against all marketing conventional wisd
the product instead, making it less conver
charged with adding water and a real egg tr50 • INSIDE THE BOX
the perception that the powdered egg had been subtracted. General
Mills relaunched the new product with the slogan "Add an Egg." Sales
of Betty Crocker instant cake mix soared.
Why would such a simple thing have such a large effect? First,
doing a little more work made women feel less guilty while still saving
time. Also, the extra work meant that women had invested time and
effort in the process, creating a sense of ownership. The simple act of
replacing the powdered egg with a real egg made the creation of the
cake more fulfilling and meaningful. You could even argue that an egg
has connotations of life and birth, and that the housewife "gives birth"
to her tasty creation. Okay, that may sound a bit far-fetched. But you
can't argue that this new approach didn't change everything.
Betty Crocker's egg teaches us a powerful lesson about consumer
psychology. Many other companies sell goods and services that come
prepackaged. They too might be able to innovate with the Subtraction
technique by taking out a key component and adding back a little activ-
ity for the consumer.
LOOK FOR REPLACEMENTS "RIGHT UNDER YOUR NOSE"
The Subtraction technique allows you to replace the discarded com-
ponent, but when you look for replacements, keep in mind two rules.
First, you cannot replace the item with something identical. Once it's
gone, it's gone! Note that the Betty Crocker cake mix replaced the
powdered egg with a real egg, which was a different component. While
it may seem obvious, you don't want to allow subtle modifications that
let the subtracted component creep back in.
Second, you want to look for replacements that are within your
reach: inside the box of the Closed World. It is these replacements that
lead to truly unique, surprising, yet simple innovations. In the case of
the Betty Crocker Cake, the replacement egg was within immediate
reach of the homemaker: in her refrigerator. As Leonardo da Vinci is
credited with saying, "Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication."
Consider the case of Royal Philips Electronics when it used Sub-
traction on the DVD player. Amnon Levav (who worked on the anes-
thesia machine) and SIT facilitator Amit Mayer were invited to advise
the electronics giant at the start of the DV
team at Philips wanted a way to make its
from those produced by other electronics fi
something interesting about their competit
the fact that DVDs had tremendous advant
nies were launching DVD players that lool
VCRs- the same size, shape, look, and feel
an opportunity to differentiate itself right fr
to innovate when the technology was branc
the market was saturated and mature. It w
move if it succeeded.
Let's turn back the clock and see wha
DVDs emerged in 1997, VCRs had enj
consumer success for more than twenty ye
them to enjoy movies and record TV sho
significant advantages over VHS cassettes. E
great new medium for storing content. DV
mere ⅜ inch thick-compared with the bi
which measured one inch thick. DVDs load
operate. The DVD player could jump to dif
without having to run through the entire m
ing a VHS cassette on a VCR. DVDs were :
play, easier to manufacture, and easier to sel
Yet despite all these dramatic changes :
had hardly changed at all. VCRs looked like
rectangular black (or silver) boxes with lots
the familiar window that displayed the time
tion. Because competition in the VCR ind
added feature after feature to make their
overdid it. VCRs had so many features th
how to use them. Even setting the time was
most VCR display windows were left flashi
that most VCR owners never even figured o
function-which, in turn, rendered all func
uled recording useless.52 • INSIDE THE BOX
When the DVD was introduced, manufacturers had a golden op-
portunity to take advantage of this "miracle disc" and introduce a com-
pletely new player for it. Surprisingly, they didn't take advantage of
this opportunity. When introduced in 1997, DVD players looked very
familiar.
Why did manufacturers design DVD players that closely resembled
the twenty-year-old technology they were destined to replace? Perhaps
the companies thought it would comfort consumers. After all, they
were buying a device that would replace their beloved VCR. Wasn't
it a good thing that the DVD player would fit into the same space,
and hook up in an almost identical way to stereo components and the
television? Making the transition from the old VCR player to the new
DVD player was easy. Of course, consumers had to get rid of their
collection of VHS cassettes (or store them in the attic with their old
vinyl LP records).
The problem, of course, was that the entire industry approached
DVD players as essentially a VCR box with compact discs instead of
VHS tape. Philips, however, took a different view.
Amnon led the Philips team through a series of exercises using
the Subtraction technique. They listed the DVD player's components.
Systematically, they imagined removing key components one at a time,
while keeping all the rest intact. Each step yielded a new configuration
of the device, and with it, the potential for new benefits and value.
First, they took away the buttons on the front. Initially, everyone in
the room laughed. Amnon wrote on the board, "Buttonless DVD," and
the team joked about it. But that sparked a very heated discussion. Not
everyone realized that most of the bulky box was empty. Some believed
it was obvious that consumers wanted to see all the buttons in front. No
one had ever seen a DVD without buttons, so they struggled to see the
benefit. Then one of the designers said suddenly, "We could make it real
slim."
After all, the consumer didn't need them, since the same buttons
were on the remote control. (As a practical matter, they moved them to
the side and back just in case the homeowner lost the remote control.)
Aesthetically, this gave the DVD machine a sleek, slim appearance on
the shelf. The new machine would not only fit
of entertainment units but also look much less
who might resist changing from VCRs to the
was very helpful. The fact that DVDs appearec
VCRs caused more people to adopt them.
Next, the Philips engineers subtracted the
the front panel. This same sort of screen was fo
information about operating the unit. Typicall
covered most of the front panel. But how woul
the unit without this information? Was there
the Closed World (in this case, the living room
front-panel LCD screen?
The team had the answer: the television scr
ily display operational control information suc
ward. Interesting, isn't it, how the Philips team
logic that the J&J engineers had employed to
machine?
Although it may seem obvious in hindsigh
then. Functional Fixedness causes us to see T
where movies and television shows are display
them as control screens for other devices. This
the Philips engineers to see other things that cou
Figure 2.3
VHS54 • INSIDE THE BOX
front panel of the DVD player and controlled by the remote or displayed
on the TV instead. As a direct result of subtracting and replacing like this,
Philips was able to engineer the thinnest DVD player in the industry.
The company dubbed it the Slimline and received a prestigious design
award. And it wasn't long before the entire DVD industry adopted the
Slimline as the dominant design. Thirty years of big, boxy thinking suc-
cumbed to the power of Subtraction.
The impact of the Slimline was greater than anyone even the
engineers who built it— could have anticipated. The Slimline concept
became a design archetype for many other products, including many
nonelectronic products. If you search for "slimline design" on Amazon,
you'll find more than thirty products from different categories such as
speakers, computers, telephones, watches, and even the Bible.
GOING BACKWARD TO GO FORWARD
Using Subtraction seems foreign at first because it feels like going back-
ward. Taking away things goes against the notion of technological ad-
vancement. In a sense, this is true. But from a technology point of view,
going backward should be easier. It should take less effort, time, and
money to remove things rather than cramming more features into your
product or service. Still, people usually ignore this direction because it
seemingly goes against the course of evolution.
The real question is whether Subtraction produces new value. If
you're not improving a product or service, it doesn't make much sense
to take away features. Taking away things should enhance a product or
service even when it does not advance the technology per se. That cer-
tainly happened with Philips and its Slimline DVD series. Was that just
a lucky accident? We think not. If you look around, you will spot many
products and services that have removed an essential element-going
backward—to create surprising additional value for the consumer. Look
at one of the most famous products ever: the iPod.
It's hard to imagine that the iPod was not the first MP3 in the mar
ket, given its huge commercial success today. But that's true. What's
more, it wasn't even second or third. It arrived on the market in the lag-
gardly eighth position! Seven other companies managed to launch their
versions of a portable media player before.
how many of these names do you rememb
Rio, Creative Technologies, Archos? In fact,
ers, the IXI, was prototyped in 1979, yet it u
launched the iPod. So what made the iPod
have that knocked most of these other music
Was it superior sound quality? Longer batter
None of the above. Functionally speaking, t
counts except two: simplicity and design.
First, some background: Competition wa
so companies tried to outdo one another wi
ucts with more functionality. For example,
ers appeared on the market, they included
listeners organize songs into playlists. Thes
complete control over their songs and the o
As the market heated up, companies launch
better LCD displays that could do more ti
considered such an essential component of M
focused on improving their technology and
they thought, moving forward.
The first-generation iPod was a huge succ
innovative fashion, eliminated the display al
random "shuffle" function—in effect, moving
inal iPod. The folks at Apple suggested some
iPod. Rather than allowing consumers to choc
to hear, in the order they wanted to hear thes
plays songs in random order. You'd think this
Don't people want more, not less, control o
Astonishingly, the shuffle was embraced whole
generation." People loved it. They didn't have
and managing playlists of songs in a specific
delivered your music like a radio station-you
would play next. That surprise made listening
And the fact that supposedly the iPod was
one cared. Except possibly for dedicated gadge56 • INSIDE THE BOX
no more concerned about MP3 technology than they were about all the
surplus functions on their VCRs.
So Apple did what Philips had done. It subtracted a component
thought to be essential by the rest of the industry. It kept the rest of the
product "as is" without replacing that component. In doing so, it sent
a powerful message to consumers: that the shuffle function was easier
and more fun to use than the MP3 players crammed with features.
Apple launched the second-generation iPod Shuffle in 2006. That
also proved an enormous success. The company targeted ordinary iPod
owners who wanted a second, less expensive player that was "jaw-
droppingly small," according to Amazon. They also believed that the
Shuffle's price and simplicity would attract new users to the Apple
brand. Eventually these consumers might make a more dedicated leap
to Apple products and purchase a more complex iPod or even a Macin-
tosh computer. Indeed, many iPhone adopters came from the base of
customers using the iPod.
A study of iPod Shuffle users confirmed the perception of the iPod
as unique and innovative. A simple subtraction of a component thought
to be essential took the technology backward and moved music enjoy-
ment forward-and changed the music-playing device world forever.
Now, that's innovation.
WHAT IS AN "ESSENTIAL" COMPONENT?
The Subtraction pattern is so simple that its disruptive powers often
surprise people. As we saw in the anesthesia example, the product de-
velopment team felt insulted by the idea of removing key components.
But once the engineers got over their discomfort, the tool led them to
innovations that radically changed the way doctors worked in operating
rooms around the world.
Our point is this: A key to using Subtraction is selecting an essential
component to remove. But what do we mean by that? Notice in the
previous examples that the subtracted component was neither the most
essential nor the least essential. It was somewhere in the middle. This is
where you are likely to get the most impact using the Subtraction tech-
nique. In the case of the anesthesia machin
drug itself would have gone too far, obvious
screen, on the other hand, were essential, bu
ments.
If you remove too simple a component,
enough to break fixedness. So how do you k
ply have to experiment to see if you have go
"OH, THIS IS GOING TO BE ADDICTIVE"
When you use Subtraction, you don't alw
component. There is also what we call "Partia
technique as long as the product or service ti
benefit. To deploy Partial Subtraction, you pi
eliminate a specific feature of that compon
Twitter, a microblogging application used bi
people worldwide. By simply restricting each
Twitter has become a vast digital conversat
als around the globe are thinking and doing
the traditional blog down to 140 characters c
volume of and participation in this Internet 1
happen?
Twitter founders Noah Glass, Jack Dorsey,
concept was right and that they had a potentia
intent was to create a service that allowed peo
to many friends at one time. Originally, Twittes
a way for people to easily update their friends
But when attempting to build a service
its foundation, the Twitter team ran into cha
expensive. On top of that, phone companies
size of text messages. Any text message of mo
automatically split into two messages. So the
ter founders did was to place a limit on the ni
short message service (SMS) text (now called :
Subtracted text messages by reducing the size58 • INSIDE THE BOX
for the sender's user name and the colon in front of the message. In
February 2007, Dorsey wrote, "One could change the world with one
hundred and forty characters."
He was right. Today more than 100 million users subscribe to Twit-
ter. The Twitter website gets more than 400 million unique visitors each
month. It has become the global "listening post" when real-time events
such
as the March 2011 Japanese tsunami and the Egyptian revolu-
tion two months earlier are happening. Glass said in an interview, "You
know what's awesome about this thing? It makes you feel like you're
right with that person. It's a whole emotional impact. You feel like
you're connected."
Partial Subtraction can create just as much value as a full Subtrac-
tion. Remember the Mango mobile phone? Partial Subtractions have
another advantage. Sometimes you can convince skeptics to do a Partial
Subtraction rather than stripping out a component completely to get
them on board.
SUBTRACT WHAT LITTLE YOU HAVE
The Subtraction technique can scare people at first. Some worry
that they are detracting from the value that a product or service of-
fers. That's especially true when you have only a limited number of
components to start with, as defined by the Closed World. Taking away
one in the name of innovation seems irrational. But as you'll see, Sub-
traction works surprisingly well even when you start with very little.
Take a simple product such as laundry detergent, which has only
three main components: the active ingredient (detergent), perfume,
and a binding agent to hold everything together. Now try this: Quickly
run each component through your mind and imagine subtracting it
from the other two. What mental pictures do you get? For most people,
it conjures up horrible images of their clothes destroyed by a flawed
product. Taking any one of the three out of the product would seem to
ruin it. Who would want to wash clothes with a detergent missing any
of these components?
Now let's look at a company called Vitco Detergents, which used
the Subtraction technique to create a completely new and innovative
product. In 1996 Vitco used the method fo
beyond a small selection of products. One
detergent.
Let's follow the same steps that Vitco
to its line of laundry detergents:
Step 1: List the product's physical components.
• Active ingredients (detergents)
• Perfumes
• Binders
Step 2: Remove a component, preferably an esse
gent, an essential component is the detergent, of
Step 3: Visualize the resulting concept. What we
that contained only perfume and binder. It could
tion was lost when we subtracted the active ingred
Step 4: Identify needs, benefits, and markets. At fil
lous. Who'd want a detergent that couldn't clean ci
That's when one of the workshop parti
minded the team that active ingredients are
terial and actually wear it out. Removing th
allow the clothes to last longer. Therefore, a
those individuals who launder their clothes
worn, not because they are dirty. Their clothe
They just need to be refreshed
The technical experts knew that they cor
with few or no active ingredients. The produ
binder, too. This might actually work!
The main challenge they faced was
a le
regulations, Vitco could not market it as a c
required a minimum amount of active ingre
product as a detergent. The company's CEO
the innovation workshop, had an immediate60 B INSIDE THE BOX
launch a product that will define a new category? How about "Clothes
Fresheners"? Aimed at those fussy people who wash clothes after mini-
mal wearing because they don't feel fresh enough, the product would
give them that fresh feeling without inflicting the wear and tear on the
clothes that frequent laundering with a real detergent would. A whole
new category of products was born: the laundry freshener.
That same year, the giant consumer goods company Unilever ac-
quired 60 percent of Vitco's shares. After the acquisition, Unilever reset
Vitco's priorities and shut down the new-product-development pipe-
line. The acquisition gave Unilever access to so many new (to it) prod-
ucts that it didn't feel a need to develop any new products. The clothes
freshener concept was set aside.
Too bad for Unilever. Four years later, its main competitor, Procter
& Gamble, launched the same product concept as part of its Febreze
brand. P&G coined the term "clothing refreshers." Extensive market
research revealed the insight that consumers sometimes need just to
freshen their clothes without a full washing. Using that insight, P&G
independently developed the same idea that Subtraction had led the
Vitco team to: a simple "detergent" with virtually no cleaning elements.
The clothing refresher business now reaps an annual $l billion from
worldwide sales.
Note that Vitco discovered the idea simply and inexpensively using
the Subtraction technique. P&G, on the other hand, conducted exten
sive consumer research to identify this market need. This dramatizes
one of our strongest beliefs: that the innovation patterns in this book
are essentially predictors of market success. Although reading market
signals through research will certainly lead to innovative ideas, the same
innovations can be achieved much more efficiently using the innovation
techniques here.
SUBTRACTION WHEN IT'S FORCED UPON YOU
Sometimes Subtraction is thrust upon us rather than chosen delib-
erately. Even in those situations, you can train your mind to use the
technique to open up creative possibilities.
In August 2010, the world was on edge from the news that thirty-
three Chilean miners were trapped 2,30
bottom of a collapsed mine shaft. The acci
the usual routes of escape. All traditiona
With hope that anyone would survive the
an international rescue team swiftly implen
escape tube that carried the men out of da
the miners from what otherwise would ha
death. After sixty-six days, the last miner em
cheers and celebrations heard around the gl
What most people don't know is that
a half century old. First conceived in the n
inspired solution has radically changed resc
broad range of industries and scenarios.
In May 1955, a mine shaft collapsed in
German city of Gelsenkirchen. Three mi
ground. Although rescuers managed to provi
a stall borehole, they couldn't get the men
had effectively sealed all existing mine shafts
tracted."
A thirty-four-year-old engineer working
took a different approach to solving the p
focused on attempting to reopen a mine she
He subtracted the main shafts from the situ
ment with a nonobvious component: the bor
a small cigar-shaped capsule out of ordinar
inches wide, the capsule was small enough t
rescuers were using to send food and water d
its tiny size, the capsule was large enough for
into. Rescuers successfully retrieved each of
workers this way.
"What they did at Dahlbusch was a master
Sabo, a forty-year veteran of mine rescue ope
rescue at the Ohio Mine Safety Training Cen
rescue has been around for hundreds of year
small borehole to rescue one miner at a time v62 • INSIDE THE BOX
As you'll hear us say over and over, this solution was obvious in
hindsight. But rescuers were blinded by Functional and Structural
Fixedness. Humans have been mining the earth for many thousands
of years. Over time, the process has evolved considerably as successive
generations come up with new and safer engineering and construction
methodologies. The downside of this long history of innovation is that
mining professionals believe they truly understand "best practices" for
operational efficiency and safety. The sheer weight of experience—
usually considered an advantage in a profession—has limited their abil-
ity to think creatively.
A mine is an intricate, interconnected network of vertical, sloped,
and horizontal shafts. Miners are proud of the careful planning, rig-
orous engineering, and strong construction skills required to build a
shaft. Each miner possesses an indelible mental map of the entire mine
network. He wouldn't be able to do his job without it. Yet this mental
map creates a significant amount of Structural Fixedness. Whenever
a disaster occurs, the first step in mine rescue protocol dictates using
the existing infrastructure of mine shafts to release all miners at once.
So plan A involves attempting to unblock the shaft that leads to the
victims' location. This makes perfect sense: mine engineers, managers,
and safety professionals know the exact location and structural integ-
rity of each mine shaft, and how each one connects to all the others,
They spent years building these shafts, and many more years working in
them. Using existing shafts as rescue conduits is the quickest and safest
way to get their coworkers back to the surface of the earth. But some-
times plan A fails.
In Germany, in 1955, plan A proved untenable. So the rescue
team had to "put every option on the table," according to Rob McGee
from the United States Mine Rescue Association. This pushed Au into
thinking the unthinkable. Breaking the temptation to view the world
through the lens of Structural Fixedness, he stopped to consider po-
tential replacements within the Closed World. By subtracting the main
mine shaft and then replacing it with an airhole, he saved not just those
three German lives but also many future lives, as the mining industry
adopted his technique as the gold standard for plan B. Indeed, Au's
capsule rescued trapped individual miners ir
1956 and 1957. In 1963 the capsule saved e
depth of 190 feet for two weeks in an iron o1
States Mine Safety and Health Association
primed and ready to go anywhere in the worl
The Phoenix capsule used to rescue the th
was an enhanced version of Au's original de
Chilean navy built three that were slightly la
8 feet long and 21 inches in diameter-and a
phones, speakers, and oxygen supplies. Othe
proven amazingly robust.
Eberhard Au died in 1996 at the age of s
plied for a patent for his capsule. "The main th
there," he reportedly said.
SUBTRACTION REFRAMES THE PROBLEM FOR YOU
You don't have to wait for a disaster to use Su
systematically to reframe problems, innovativ
at you. Drew found this out firsthand while sp
training conference. After he finished his tall
approached the stage. They introduced thems
board of Standard Bank of South Africa. They
the story.
"LET'S FIRE THEM ALL!" (DREW'S STORY)
I had just finished my talk on Systematic Inve
I had stressed the usefulness of the Subtracti
bank board members introduced themselves.?
innovation is something that can be learned an
pecially interested in Subtraction. "Do you thir
our problem?" asked one of the delegates.
I answered the same way I always do whe
don't know. But there is only one way to find o
meeting room in the conference hall and mad
The executives explained their problem.64 • INSIDE THE BOX
"We want to grow by acquiring other banks," said one of the man-
agers, who seemed to be the appointed spokesperson. "We agree about
that. We just can't seem to agree on the best approach. Some of us
want to buy another bank in South Africa, while others like the idea of
acquiring a bank in North America or Europe. How can we use this in-
novation method to resolve this problem?"
I thought about it for a minute. I had never faced this type of strat-
egy problem before. I really didn't know if Subtraction would work as
well with business model innovation as it did with traditional product
or service innovation. But I was willing to try. (Only later did I discover
that Jacob's colleagues had been using it this way for quite a while.)
So I jumped in. "Okay, let's be true to the process and start from
the top. The first step of Subtraction is to list the key components. What
are the components of a bank?"
The directors looked around at one another. It was such a simple
question that it seemed to take them off guard. "Staff. We have employ-
ees of many types."
"Good. Let's write down 'staff." I picked up a marker and began
making a list of bank components. "What else?"
"Assets," said one. "Liabilities!" chimed in another. 'We have build-
ings, ATMs, locations-we call it PPE, for property, plant, and equip-
ment."
"Keep going."
"We have systems, and, of course, we have customers. We also have
a reputation-our brand."
I wrote this on the whiteboard:
• Staff
• Assets
• Liabilities
• Property
• Systems
• Products and services
• Customers
• Brand
"Now let's use Subtraction and remo
preferably an essential one." I noticed some
gotten used to this reaction. And many ti
will create a product or service configuratic
and joke telling, the human mind makes
unrelated themes to form the punch line.
But even in serious situations such as this o
nique results in a chuckle or two. Two unre
were about to collide, and the men just co
to laugh.
"Let's subtract the staff!" said one of ti
it half-jokingly, but he was genuinely inter
process would lead.
"All right. Imagine that your bank has t
other components, just no staff. Now ask
you buy that has the ideal labor force for
are? Given your customer base, your branc
services, what bank out there has the perfe
fit well with the rest of your components?"
One of the executives said, "We could 1
is more diverse, for example. Perhaps we wa
perspective. We could acquire a bank with e
with our employees but give us a broader pe
Just imagining their company without
nents helped these senior executives gain a
how to solve their problem. It no longer ma
located. Geography had nothing to do with
tion technique (with the replacement featu
created a more useful dialogue about acqu
problem in this new light made merging wit
interesting.
I let the discussion go on for a while. "P
another component from the list-any one o
"Brand. Let's subtract the company's bra
this time.66 • INSIDE THE BOX
"Very good. You have all the other components of your bank, but no
brand. Now, what bank could you acquire that has a brand reputation
that is ideally suited for the rest of the components: your staff, customer
base, and so on?" The men thought about it for a moment, each of them
pondering the various banks that might fit this profile. They were silent,
actively thinking about other components written on the whiteboard.
After a few minutes, the leader of the group shook my hand and
thanked me. Politely, he asked me to leave the room. "We have some
work to do," he said
Following that meeting in 2004, Standard Bank of South Africa
went on to acquire banks in Argentina, Turkey, Russia, and Nigeria.
Note that it did not actually get rid of its staff, its brand, or any of the
other components with these acquisitions. The point of using Subtrac-
tion was to mentally imagine the bank without these components as
a way to reframe the problem and see opportunities in new, creative
ways. It worked!
HOW TO USE SUBTRACTION
To get the most out of the Subtraction technique, you follow five basic
steps:
1. List the product's or service's internal components.
2. Select an essential component and imagine removing it. There are two
ways:
a. Full Subtraction. The entire component is removed.
b. Partial Subtraction. Take one of the features or functions of the compo-
nent away or diminish it in some way.
3. Visualize the resulting concept (no matter how strange it seems).
4. Ask: What are the potential benefits, markets, and values? Who would want
this new product or service, and why would they find it valuable? If you are
trying to solve a specific problem, how can it help address that particular
challenge? After you've considered the concept "as is" (without that es-
sential component), try replacing the function with something from the
Closed World (but not with the original component). You can replace the
component with either an internal or an exter
potential benefits, markets, and values of the
5. If you decide that this new product or servic
feasible? Can you actually create these new i
services? Why or why not? is there any way t
make it more viable?
Many of the products and services that y
ated by using Subtraction-whether their
For example, if you're reading this book wh
you've been using a "subtracted" product th
lens is the result of subtracting traditional eye
Many self-service products are the direct
service gas stations, self-service checkout lanc
airport check-in kiosks are all examples of sit
part of a service was subtracted and replaced
these things for granted, but it wasn't always
ple that one day machines would spit out mor
would have said you were crazy. Only by look
ate how the counterintuitive notion of "subti
an enormously convenient banking service ca
worldwide.
Look at how certain foods have become n
subtracting an essential component. Taking wai
the more convenient powdered instant soup.
soup is
a nice example of a partial subtract
benefits are smaller can size and longer shelf
been completely transformed, thanks to comp
online retailer, and Netflix, the entertainmer
tracted the traditional brick-and-mortar stores:
the Internet. IKEA, the giant home goods co
but it sells furniture unassembled. IKEA subtra
of manufacturing furniture. It replaced its asse
customer.68 • INSIDE THE BOX
COMMON PITFALLS IN USING SUBTRACTION
As with all the techniques we describe in this book, you must use Sub-
traction correctly to get results. Here's how to avoid some common
pitfalls:
• Don't just take out troublesome components. Taking out bad components
to improve the performance is not using the Subtraction technique. Rather,
it is fine-tuning the characteristics of the product to change the way it
works. For example, taking out the sugar in soda to create a sugar-free drink
certainly creates a new version of the original beverage. But this is not Sub-
traction. This is simply changing the recipe. The same is true when you turn
caffeinated coffee into decaffeinated.
• Try taking out essential components. Remember the laundry freshener
example? Febreze is the result of taking the most essential ingredient out
of laundry detergent: the detergent itself! People tend to avoid taking out
something essential because it seems so absurd. Either they want to steer
away from the discomfort of "ruining" their product, or they simply don't
believe in the power of the Subtraction technique. The key is to mentally vi-
sualize and focus on what's left in the system rather than focusing on what's
missing. By seeing all the remaining components as part of a new and use-
ful configuration, you will cope better with the dissonance of having taken
out the most essential part.
• Avoid immediately replacing the subtracted component. Eliminating an
essential component can assault your senses and sensibilities. This is a
time when your old nemesis Structural Fixedness will kick in at its strongest.
The discomfort of removing an essential element is so powerful that our
minds immediately rush in to "rescue" the product or service. (Remember
what we mean by "essential": not the most or least important element, but
something in the middle.) You may find yourself instantly searching to fill in
the void with an alternative component. Be careful. Sometimes removing
the critical, core function ruins the product to the point where you cannot
recover. Taking out a core function can indeed lead to innovative ideas, as
we saw with the Sony Walkman, but these situations are rare. You should
almost always plan on a replacement (from the Closed World) when taking
out a core function.
• Don't succumb to cognitive dissonance. The
the strange new configuration and try to exp
Removing the screen from a TV causes most
ately as a radio, for example. But then it woul
want to display are not radio programs, but*
solely from TV stations. Also, as any enginee
components, the wavelength, and any other
this strange object as a TV without a screen,
"screenless TV" to a radio, you risk overlookin
new form of TV, such as one for people who d
drivers-who want to listen to the shows they w
the road.
• Avoid simple "unbundling." Keep in mind that
as a common marketing technique called "unb
bundling is taking out features or downgrading
a product or service. It is taking value out of ti
you can set a lower price. Companies do this to
the market, especially those customers who are
television manufacturers take their high-end, pr
the quality of the speakers, the display resolu
assign a new model number and reduce its pr
bundling happens when tour operators offer a l
(using cheaper hotels and charter flights) at a
is the same, but the amenities have been dow
benefit is created by unbundling. Benefits are re
be set lower. In Subtraction, on the other hand, ;
after a component is removed (and perhaps rep