DREW BOYD A
JACOB GOLDENB
INSIDE THE
A Proven System of C
for Breakthrough R
SIMON & SCHUSTER PAPE
NEW YORK LONDON TORONTO SYDN14 • INSIDE THE BOX
of industries, products, services, and activities. Later in the book, you
will meet some of our colleagues-researchers and practitioners-who
helped shape and perfect the method. We present real-life cases from
the experience of the team at Systematic Inventive Thinking, a consult-
ing and training company. The team teaches the method to companies
around the world to make creativity and innovation part of their cul-
tures. We will introduce you to some SIT facilitators, who graciously
shared their stories here.
We now invite you to join the growing number of people around
the world who are discovering a systematic way to reapply what man-
kind does instinctively to create remarkable innovations. First, we will
explore the Closed World in more detail so that you are convinced of
its creative power and know how to recognize it to fuel your creative
endeavors. Then, you will learn each of the five techniques through
the eyes of inventors, companies, and even children. You'll learn a step-
by-step way to apply each technique and how to avoid common pitfalls
as we impart lessons we have learned in hundreds of training workshops.
We'll then turn your attention to one of the most vexing scenarios
we face when trying to innovate: the dreaded "contradiction." Con-
tradictions occur when you must reconcile two different factors that
directly oppose each other. If you fix one factor, it tends to make the
other factor worse-and unacceptable. Contradictions often block our
creative output, but we'll show you a way to think differently about
them so you can unblock a way forward.
Our goal for this book is to make the inside-the-box approach ac-
cessible to anybody in any field and in any part of life, personal or pro-
fessional. Together we hope to show you how to work inside the box
to use your brain in a different way, and produce innovations that you
never would have imagined otherwise.
And here's the almost magical thing about inside-the-box thinking:
the more you learn about the method, the more you will start to see
how it can be applied to solve tough problems and create all sorts of
breakthroughs in the world around you. You'll find your eyes open to a
whole new world of innovation.
2A228
1
CREATIVITY I
INSIDE THE
They cannot scare me with thei
Between stars-on stars where r
I have it in me so much nearer l
To scare myself with my own de
The year 1968 is seared in world memor
pic achievements. In high-altitude, oxyg
Beamon's world-record long jump of 29 f
the greatest athletic achievement of all tim
achievement exceeded the previous world
remained unsurpassed for twenty-three yea:
Beamon's remarkable challenge to gra
coming out of the Mexico City Olympics.
stadium, an unknown athlete was responsit
matic and sensational triumphs in the histo
won the gold medal in the high jump with
invented, and which represented a radical
jumping strategies. Although he did not set
achievement revolutionized the sport. In
ally all high jumpers had adopted his appr
ous high-jump technique obsolete. This ner16 • INSIDE THE BOX
named the "Fosbury Flop" after its charming and modest, almost shy,
originator.
These two men are examples of outstanding yet radically different
paths to success in their fields. Using a conventional technique, Beamon
extended the limits of what was possible in his sport. His record is an
example of excellence of execution by taking a more-of-the-same ap-
proach. In contrast, Fosbury invented a new technique that gave him an
edge over more traditional high jumpers. Although superb performance
is an important aspect of professional success in any field, in this book
we focus on the second outcome, igniting creative revolutions.
Interestingly, the Fosbury Flop example is used often by conference
speakers and is featured in training materials to support the idea that
revolutions originate from outside-the-box thinking. After all, the tech-
nique was almost the polar opposite of the then-dominant "straddle,"
in which the jumper approached the bar face-first, jumped, and rolled
over the bar right side up, with his stomach toward the bar. In contrast,
Fosbury approached the bar with his side, turning his back to it when
rolling over. That he literally used the opposite technique was taken as
clear evidence that Fosbury was thinking outside the box.
This is a great story, we admit, but the truth is even more captivat-
ing, as Jacob and his colleagues discovered in an email interview with
Fosbury himself.
When first learning the high jump at ten years old, Fosbury learned
an antiquated, energy-wasting technique called the "scissors" by imitat-
ing children at the local gym. A year later, Fosbury's physical education
teacher and coach taught all the children trying out for track to jump
using the classic straddle, also called the "Western roll." Fosbury, how-
ever, continued to use the scissors jump until he reached high school,
mainly because he was not able to master the straddle. (See figure 1.1,
illustrating all three high-jump techniques.)
By high school, however, the scissors technique was no longer ac-
cepted. In switching to the straddle, Fosbury effectively had to learn
how to jump all over again. As a result, he fell far behind his competi-
tors. Extremely frustrated, Fosbury asked his coach if he could revert
to the old scissors style to improve his results and boost his confidence.
Figure 1.1
Although not enthusiastic, the coach was syn
lete's frustrations and agreed to let him try.
sion, instead of working to improve his strad
to the technique he felt comfortable with, ev
Fosbury decided to try his old style in his
awkward yet determined, he cleared his pre
4 inches, but when he faced a new height,
thing in the technique had to be changed. Tl
with the scissors is that the jumper knocks 1
buttocks. To compensate, Fosbury tried lifti
forced him to simultaneously drop his sho
He continued to raise his hips until he ever
inches, which allowed him to place fourth
a new personal record. No one noticed wh
cause he was tweaking the old technique, on
attempt was only marginally different from
Fosbury slowly began overtaking the competi
opposing teams noticed that he was doing so
ing the rule book, they could find no evidenc
hybrid technique. Fosbury was simply apply
ments to an existing one. At some point, he b
his back, arching his hips, and then unarching
In 2003 Jacob and his colleagues conduc
of the world's leading sports experts. They rat18 • INSIDE THE BOX
Figure 1.2
.........544
IS OTHER
ITEMS
MOVEMENT
RUNNING
SHOES
FIBERQLASE
FOLE FOR
FOLE SAKET
SENT HaTTE
TRACK
FOSSURY
FLOPK
single most significant revolution in the history of sports. The Fosbury
Flop received an average rating of 5, while innovations such as synthetic
track or running shoes lagged by two or more points (figure 1.2).
Creativity speakers tell this story as a way of demonstrating that
Fosbury was thinking "outside of the straddle box." But as you can judge
from the actual facts, this is not true. Fosbury was, in fact, thinking "in-
side the scissors box."
THE CLOSED WORLD
This book explains Systematic Inventive Thinking, our inside-the-box
way of thinking about creativity and innovation. We'll show how the
Closed World principle that you read about in the introduction-the
idea that highly creative solutions to problems are often hiding in plain
sight within an existing product, service, or environment—-fits with Sys-
tematic Inventive Thinking.
But before we take our first steps together, let's make sure that
you're on board with our basic premise. After all, we're challenging
today's single biggest myth about creativity: that it requires outside-
the-box thinking. We want to convince you that the opposite is true.
Creativity is rarely achieved by broadening your horizons. You're much
more likely to become distracted by distant stars in a faraway galaxy
and come up with concepts that are irrel
More important, elevating your vision enc
that is, thinking with no basis in the conc
cliched rather than creative, as the test of 1
when you implement them. As the (cliché
the details.
As we discussed in the introduction, '
ferent approach. We believe that you'll t
focus on the internal aspects of a situation
constrain your options rather than broaden
closing the boundaries of a particular creati
ing only inside these boundaries, you can be
tently than by musing about the stratosphe
muse to descend.
Let's start by understanding the insic
Closed World.
THE NINE-DOT PUZZLE
Although studying creativity is considered
cipline nowadays, it is still a very young on
chologist named J. P. Guilford was one of th
who dared to conduct a study of creativit
famous studies was the nine-dot puzzle, I
in figure 1.3. He challenged research subjer
using just four straight lines without lifting
Today many people are familiar with this pu
1970s, however, very few were even aware o
it had been around for almost a century.
If you've never seen this puzzle before
solve it before continuing. Those of you who
zle can confirm that your first attempts usu
inside the imaginary square. The correct solu
to draw lines that extend beyond the area de
At the first stages, all the participants i20 • INSIDE THE BOX
Figure 1.3
(even those who eventually solved the puzzle) censored their own
thinking by limiting the possible solutions to those within the imagi-
nary square. Even though they weren't instructed to restrain themselves
from considering such a solution, they were unable to "see" the white
space beyond the square's boundaries. Only 20 percent managed to
break out of the illusory confinement and continue their lines in the
white space surrounding the dots.
The symmetry, the beautiful simplicity of the solution, and the
fact that 80 percent of the participants were effectively blinded by
the boundaries of the square led Guilford and the readers of his books
to leap to the sweeping conclusion that creativity requires you to go
outside the box. The idea went viral (via 1970s-era media and word
of mouth, of course). Overnight, it seemed that creativity gurus every-
where were teaching managers how to think outside the box.
Management consultants in the 1970s and 1980s even used this
puzzle when making sales pitches to prospective clients. Because the
solution is, in hindsight, deceptively simple, clients tended to admit
they should have thought of it themselves. Because they hadn't, they
were obviously not as creative or smart as they had previously thought,
and needed to call in creative experts. Or so their consultants would
have them believe.
The nine-dot puzzle and the phrase "th
became metaphors for creativity and spread li
management, psychology, the creative arts, e
improvement circles. There seemed to be no
could be offered under the banner of thinking
ers, trainers, training program developers, or
and university professors all had much to say a
outside-the-box thinking. It was an appealing
ing message.
Indeed, the concept enjoyed such strong
appeal that no one bothered to check the fact
two different research teams--Clarke Burnha
and Joseph Alba with Robert Weisberg-ran ar
the same puzzle but a different research procec
Both teams followed the same protocol of d
two groups. The first group was given the same
ticipants in Guilford's experiment. The second
solution required the lines to be drawn outside
dering the dot array. In other words, the "trick"
Would you like to guess the percentage of the
ond group who solved the puzzle correctly? M
60 percent to 90 percent of the group given th
puzzle easily. In fact, only a meager 25 percent c
What's more, in statistical terms, this 5 perc
the subjects of Guilford's original study is insigr
the difference could easily be due to what sta
error.
Let's look a little more closely at these sur
this problem requires people to literally think or
ticipants' performance was not improved even
specific instructions to do so. That is, direct and
think outside the box did not help.
That this advice is useless when actually tryi
involving a real box should effectively have kille
widely disseminated-and therefore, much more22 • INSIDE THE BOX
that out-of-the-box thinking spurs creativity. After all, with one simple
yet brilliant experiment, researchers had proven that the conceptual
link between thinking outside the box and creativity was a myth.
Of course, in real life you won't find boxes. But you will find nu-
merous situations where a creative breakthrough is staring you in the
face. They are much more common than you probably think right now.
Throughout this book, we will be providing you with lots of examples of
famous innovations that can be traced directly to the techniques even if
the creators of those innovations weren't aware of what they were doing
at the time. To demonstrate how simple the techniques are, we'll also
present real cases where individuals who used this approach successfully
innovated across a wide range of industries and business domains.
USING THE CLOSED WORLD TO OPEN UP CREATIVE POSSIBILITIES
The Closed World is based on the idea that you look inward rather than
outward, and that this propels you toward the virgin territory of truly
creative ideas ideas that are both original and useful.
Although he first published this idea in 2000, Roni Horowitz
started developing his Closed World principle several years earlier by
collecting data on what he considered highly inventive solutions to en-
gineering problems. Horowitz noticed that these ideas all satisfied two
conditions. First, they contradicted some essential belief in the prevail-
ing wisdom about the right way to do things. (You'll learn more about
this, which we call contradiction, in chapter 7.)
Second, all the solutions were contained in a relatively small space
surrounding the problem. This is what Roni called the Closed World of
the problem. He believed that it could be applied as a general guideline
in teaching creativity.
After several years of working with Roni, and on the basis of our
own recent research and field experience of our colleagues at SIT, we
had enough evidence to prove that the Closed World principle is indeed
relevant to creativity in all fields. Here are several examples that will
help you get a better idea of what the Closed World entails and how
you can use it to become more creative.
FLAT TIRE
One night, around midnight, two young
cided to end a long day at their workplace al
reached the parking lot, they discovered a f
As it happened, the two engineers were close
for their bachelor of science degrees together
same company, and they enjoyed solving pro
them knew that this inconsequential inciden
direction of their lives.
The two engineers should have had no
on the car, which was a rental that had to be
But when one of them tried to loosen the lug
he discovered that the nuts were rusted tigh
everything to put more pressure on the wren
jumping upon it, but the nuts would not bud
cell phone to call for assistance. Yet they did
doning the car in an empty parking lot.
Realizing that they would not be able to
sheer force, the engineers sought a different :
tire wrench would give them added leverag
Perhaps a piece of pipe could be used to exte
wrench to give the leverage they needed. Un
locate any pipe or tubing. They realized that ti
be found, would have to come from whateve
ately at hand.
Before we continue with this story, pleas
plest solution to this problem. But it can't
which students in our workshops suggest all ti
• Call for help using a cell phone. (It's 1990-cell p
• Inflate the tire temporarily using one of those foa
don't have a can handy.)
• Find a piece of metal pipe and use it to extend th
none to be found.)24 • INSIDE THE BOX
• Hitch a ride to the nearest service station. (Why not go this route? One, it's
too dangerous, and, two, because we said so: the goal here is to come up
with a Closed World solution.
These noncreative solutions have one thing in common: they are far
removed from the core element of the problem, which is the flat tire.
Visually, you can think of them as existing outside the car; they are com-
pletely external to the car body.
So let's use the Closed World principle. Let's, metaphorically speak-
ing, look inside the box, which in this case means inside the car-and
only inside the car—for a possible solution.
One possible solution would be to place the tire wrench handle
under the wheel of the car and utilize the car's engine to move the
wheel and push down on the tire wrench to loosen the lug nut. But this
would require plenty of practice. Probably less difficult to execute is
the idea of taking a few drops of oil from under the hood to lubricate
and loosen the nuts. (By the way, if ever you need oil in a case like this,
remember to use the brake oil, which does not get hot and attacks the
rust better.) Another way to use the car's components would be to at-
tempt to lengthen the tire wrench handle with the tailpipe. But this is
one solution that we really don't recommend. You would need a hack-
saw to cut off a section. Plus typical tailpipes are far wider in diameter
than a tire wrench handle. You have no way to fit them together. This
is a terrible idea, but it is more original than the pipe outside the car.
Perhaps we are moving in an interesting direction?
All these ideas also have something in common: they are all inside
the car, that is, part of the car. What these few simple solutions show
is the inverse relationship between the degree of creativity and the dis-
tance of the idea or material (or "resource") from the Closed World of
the problem (changing a flat tire). The further away the resource, the
less creative the solution it generates. Indeed, our Closed World prin-
ciple says that the further you go from the problem, the less creative
you will be.
Roni Horowitz was one of the two engineers in the story, and the
incident led to his formulating the Closed V
enberg was the second engineer. As soon :
aloud--he said, "We need to find somethi
vicinity of it to help us with these %$%$#!
a solution in less than one minute. The solut
in plain sight. It had been there all along, wa
was the jack. Jacob remembers sensing the
him as he reached for it.
It was a simple task to use the jack to :
wrench. The jack magnifies applied effort us
or hydraulics. It's very strong-after all, it's d
fore, it easily created enough force to loos
could then be used for its original function.'
see how it works, just in case you may need i
This was a defining moment for both Ja
became clear to them. First, problems have h
not normally see, and these are the ideas that
second was that they would give up aeronau
their lives studying creativity, inside the box.
Figure 1.426 • INSIDE THE BOX
MORE ON THE CLOSED WORLD
In his research on inventive solutions, Roni has focused on engineering
problems, developing a technique to identify and distinguish between
solutions inside and outside the Closed World.
We've noticed that the Closed World is not exactly a uniform space.
One way to sense the Closed World is by moving closer to the world of
the problem. Look inside rather than outside. It seems more accurate to
describe the problem space to reflect Roni's initial insight: in our search
for a solution, the nearer we come to the core of the problem, the more
creative the solution will be. That was Roni's aha! moment.
Make no mistake: we are not saying that every single element in
the Closed World of the problem can be used to devise a solution. We
argue, instead, that if a solution exists, then the solution that uses elements
from the Closed World will be more creative.
Which brings us to another important point: the purpose of the
Closed World is to teach creativity first and foremost. It's not to always
come up with the best solution to a problem at hand. Sometimes the
best solution to a problem can actually be found outside the box. But
if your goal is to systematize creativity, you have to operate within the
confines of the Closed World. That is key.
This notion that creativity is enhanced by constraints, not free-
dom, is confirmed by recent research findings in cognitive psychology,
a subdiscipline of psychology that explores internal mental processes.
The research also undermines the out-of-the-box argument. Called the
"limited scope principle" by the previously mentioned Ronald Finke,
Thomas Ward, and Steven Smith in their book Creative Cognition:
Theory, Research, and Applications, this theory asserts that by limiting
the number of variables under consideration from infinity to a finite
number, we amplify our potential to come up with a creative solution.
Why? Such limits boost the creative process, allowing individuals to be
more focused.
In the flat-tire problem above, when people were asked to rank all
the proposed solutions in order, from most creative to least creative,
the jack was considered the most creative solution of all. And the jack
is obviously very close to the Closed Worl
jack is not merely one more piece of equip
the car. It is an integral part of the car's ti
when asked to list all the elements of a tire
the one element that people never forget (:
some do forget to list the spare tire). Soluti
outside the car are always considered less cr
ried about this process.
Perhaps when people eliminate resou
problem world to its basic elements, they
resourcefulness. Creativity is really about as
limited list of possibilities, rather than ranc
leaps and bounds. This, then, is our first rule
To get a better feel for the Closed Worl
flat-tire illustration. Let's suppose that your
on a deserted strip of beach in Mexico. No
can't find any wooden sticks or paper or ott
the tires for traction. On the other hand, yor
principle to help. The first thing you have t
creative thinking and stress do not go han
member whether you have ever heard of a
whether you can think of some solutions us.
mon sense. If you still are stuck in the sand
inside the box, or inside yourself. Do not loo
efforts brainstorming random suggestions or
making "mind maps" that take you further a
problem. When you look inward, you see t
surface that you can push between the whee
World principle says that it has to be inside
there they are, lying on the floor of the car: th
are rough, so they will provide sufficiently
They are also flexible, so you can easily pust
'have to have them replaced after your suc
operation, but you can put that down to coll28 • INSIDE THE BOX
THE MARKER ON THE BOARD (JACOB'S STORY)
The moment I walked into the classroom, I could see that something
was different. The students were excited, I could feel the anticipation in
the air and something about their faces made me think that they were
planning something mischievous.
I understood their amusement as soon as I tried to erase the white-
board, which was still covered with diagrams and equations from my
previous class. As hard as I tried, I couldn't erase the remnants of the
previous lecture. Someone had apparently switched my markers last
time, and I had unknowingly used an indelible marker.
Students were now leaning back in their chairs, openly smiling. As
plainly as if spoken out loud, they were waiting for me to prove that
my systematic creativity method really worked. If I had to describe the
feeling in the classroom, I would have guessed it to be: "The professor is
going down in flames!"
I decided to accept the challenge. "All right, class," I said with deter-
mination. "The worst thing that can happen is that there is no creative
solution to this situation. But if there is one, we should be able to find it
with what we have learned in the previous classes."
First, I asked them to define a good traditional but noncreative solu-
tion to the problem.
"Getting some liquid from the janitor to dissolve the indelible
marker?" suggested one student.
"Right," I replied, beginning to feel more confident. Perhaps my stu-
dents were with me now.
"Remember the Closed World concept: let's confine our searches
for a creative solution to resources that are inside this classroom. If we
find something, it should be more original, even if not necessarily more
useful or efficient, than going to the janitor."
"Why would we go for a solution that was less useful than one we
could easily find outside this room?" one student wanted to know.
"In this class, we are looking only for creative solutions," I said
"Let's leave the noncreative ones outside the Closed World-in this
case, literally outside this room."
Students started rummaging through their bags, pulling out nail
polish remover, perfume bottles, and other a
ing a can of cold beer). None of them wor
dents were amazed at what their classmates
"You see?" I smiled. "There are more re:
you search inside, rather than expanding yo
reason, a search inside yields ideas that we
what was he thinking bringing beer to my c
With growing confidence, I continued, "
can find if we look even closer to the Clo
Let's confine the space we are searching e
the things that are at the very core of the
writing world."
Silence, of the blessed kind. The student
"We could use an erasable marker to er:
pered one student. "The erasable marker sho
dissolve the markings on the board." I teste
regular marker to write over one of the line:
used an eraser to erase the line, it worked. /
ible mark underneath remained
After the initial shock, the class becam
to ignore the noise and began erasing the bo
But writing over every stroke of every !
last class was a long, slow process. I was beg
attempt to complete the task, or assume th:
begin teaching. Just then, another student
we can erase the board using the indelible n
When I tried this, I found that the i
source of the problem-contained enough s
on the whiteboard. After some trials, the s
ible marker was just as effective as a regular
wrote over the marks on the board and erase
the liquid solvent evaporated, the old mark
in the new marks drawn on top of them. Th
came the solution.
Note that this is not a better solution30 • INSIDE THE BOX
just as slow-but it is more original, more surprising, and more inside
the Closed World.
I turned back to the class, gratified but surprised that the exercise
had gone so well. Keep in mind that this incident took place years ago,
before we'd accumulated empirical evidence (evidence from observa-
tion or experimentation) about the richness of the Closed World
"Okay, people, point made! The Closed World is not endless, but
the resources inside it exceed our initial perceptions, and we should
make it a habit to look inside, especially if our only options are con-
tained there."
I triumphantly made my victory speech. "Sometimes traditional
solutions do not fit; sometimes they do not exist. What if the janitor's
office were closed? Looking inside, to resources we usually overlook,
might be challenging cognitively but effective when a creative solution
is required."
With a sigh of relief, I added, "Now, could someone please go to the
janitor and bring me something to clean the board?"
HOW BRAINSTORMING PRODUCES FEWER AND LOWER-QUALITY IDEAS
Now let's examine this subject from the opposite perspective by look-
ing at brainstorming, perhaps the most widely known technique to
spring from the out-of-the-box creativity movement.
The ingenious term brainstorming conjures up images of unleashed
whirlwind forces of energy. The simplicity of the technique and its easy
assimilation in organizational settings, coupled with the enjoyment that
participants derive from the process, explain its ubiquity. Advertising
agency teams meet for brainstorming to develop "creative concepts" or
new advertising strategies; engineers meet to resolve obstacles to the
R&D (research and development) process; and even senior managers
invite employees at different levels to review and identify new ideas
to promote their organization and its functions through brainstorming
sessions.
Where did the idea of brainstorming come from? Not surprisingly,
from a creative agency that needed to generate a continuous stream of
new concepts and ideas. In 1953 Alex Osborn, a founder and manager
at the BBDO advertising agency, coined t
stimulated employees' creativity by encou
work. According to Osborn, brainstorming
creativity by encouraging them to offer the
setting. He believed that a group of peopl
effective than the same number of individi
the more ideas suggested-no matter how
the greater the chance that good ideas rem
are filtered out.
Brainstorming did create a storm, and it
of people in organizations, factories, and bi
came a widespread convention (though fre
of its basic guidelines), academic scholars i
started to study the validity of Osborn's
influenced the efficacy of the brainstorming
tions such as: What is the optimal number c
is the optimal length of a brainstorming ses
they sought to answer was: What is the real
ing, when compared with the same numbe
the same problem separately, with no conta
The strongest findings that soon emerge
• There was no advantage to a brainstorming gr
number of individuals working alone.
* The brainstorming group came up with fewer i
alone.
• The quality or creativity of the ideas generatec
was actually lower.
• The optimal number of participants in a brain:
four-in direct contrast to the conventional bel
merrier."
These results were replicated repeatedi
researchers' minds: brainstorming does not;
simply because people are in the same roon32 « INSIDE THE BOX
Researchers have also suggested several reasons for these findings.
First, "noise" interrupts individuals' train of thought. Second, some
people are "free riders," who make no contribution. Third, people don't
know whether they are making progress in the right direction.
Perhaps the most significant reason is the fear of criticism. Despite
what should be a nonjudgmental environment, participants are often
afraid of appearing stupid. They are fearless when it comes to contrib-
uting completely crazy ideas that they know no one will take seriously.
Participants are not so eager to share ideas that might be feasible, even
in a brainstorming atmosphere. As a result, the ideas generated by brain-
storming cluster around the extremes: brainstorming sessions generate
more ordinary ideas and more wacky ideas than they do creative ideas
that are both original and feasible.
In short, fifty years of hard evidence show that despite its popular
appeal, brainstorming offers no advantage if your goal is to improve
your creative problem solving. This is true for many out-of-the-box
methods advocated by management consultants and creativity experts.
WHY THE CLOSED WORLD IS MUCH BIGGER THAN THE OUTSIDE ONE
Before we conclude this chapter, some of you may be concerned that
the Closed World-and the rule that directs our thinking inside it-
necessarily restricts our options and reduces the number of solutions.
After all, the space inside a problem is much smaller than the boundless
universe outside it. What, then, you may be asking, makes us so sure
that you will be more creative using the Closed World principle?
Most researchers working on creativity today are convinced that a
proliferation of ideas and analogies actually impedes the ideation pro-
cess, and that randomness and disorganized thinking obstruct creativity.
Although unrestricted freedom may be productive in problem solving,
it stifles rather than promotes creative solutions. Consider the advice
from Dr. Margaret Boden, a researcher in the fields of artificial intelli-
gence, psychology, philosophy, cognitive science, and computer science.
We like her clear statement on this effect: "Constraints, far from being
opposed to creativity, make creativity possible. To throw away all con-
straints would be to destroy the capacity for creative thinking. Random
processes alone, if they happen to produr
can result only in first-time curiosities, not
It may sound counterintuitive, but e
leads to "idea anarchy" and a poor level
have had a firsthand or secondhand expe
devised by improvising with scant materi
lack of an essential substance or tool requi
ever communicated a big idea succinctly
score tickets to a sold-out concert (with
you can consider yourself resourceful-th
extremely efficiently. Using this same logic
straints around resources, we can prevent
productive thinking into that limited space
are frequently hiding.
It's true that we will find fewer ideas
ward the center of the problem. But the
creative than the ideas we could discover b
in mind that by applying the Closed World
searching for solutions in the greater outsi
this, either before or after your search of th
that when you search inside the Closed W
of finding creative ideas. We'll even go so
search outside the proverbial box, you pro
that searching inside the Closed World n
best solution to a given problem, but it
you with the most creative one.
Above all, the Closed World is a rich
creative ideas. You simply have to get use
the point of this book—and we'll be givin
and tools to keep you focused and produc
be more creative.
THE CLOSED WORLD AND THE WORLD RALLY (JAC
John, a student in one of my creativity clas
a company that builds and races cars. Wh34 • INSIDE THE BOX
Closed World in class, he could hardly remain in his seat. He told the
class that the world of Grand Prix motorcar races operates exactly ac-
cording to the Closed World principle. Since the rules of the races force
drivers to solve their problems using only what they have on hand dur-
ing the race, rally racing teams can be considered specialists in Closed
World, inside-the-box thinking.
No fewer than 220 people are involved in the design, construction,
and preparation of each Grand Prix competition vehicle. But during
the three-day race, the driver and codriver have to negotiate twenty ob-
stacles on their own. The driver has limited knowledge of the road, and
it's the codriver's job to call out the obstacles, tell the driver how fast to
go, and specify which gear to use for every curve. Once the competition
starts, the driver and codriver can use only what is in or on the car to
keep them going to the finish line.
A typical turbocharged four-wheel drive Hyundai World Rally Car
(valued at $700,000) contains a basic tool kit, two liters of oil, one liter
of water, a spare tire, two cans of Coca-Cola, and $100 in cash. Both
team members wear fireproof underwear, a race suit, helmet, gloves,
and shoes. The only things they can take with them are food and drink.
They are allowed to make intermittent fuel stops, and if the car turns
over, spectators are allowed to help the two-man team roll the car back
onto its wheels.
The race is grueling, and no matter how well prepared the car or
its two-man team, things still go wrong. Here are some actual prob-
lems encountered by actual Grand Prix racing teams and the solutions
they devised. Would you like to try your hand at being a Closed World
thinker? Write down what you would do in each situation before read-
ing the actual solution.
Problem 1: The Rock in the River
The car drives over a shallow river crossing at 100 miles per hour, but a
huge rock on the river bottom smashes the engine's sump. The engine
loses all oil, but the codriver manages to shut the engine down before it
is ruined.
SOLUTION: The team used the two liters of
the big hole in the sump had to be sealed
simply gushed out again. The creative dri
using the basic tool kit, removed their fire
the underwear between the sump guard :
diaper.
Problem 2: The Broken Fan
The team hears and feels a powerful vibr
bay. The members stop on the side of th
the blades in the fan that keeps the eng
fan, now unbalanced, will inevitably fail c
operate it. This will cause the engine to o'
SOLUTION: Before the driver said a word,
snapped off the blade immediately oppo
balance to the fan. The car was back in th
Problem 3: The Hole in the Radiator
The driver decides to cut a corner in an
time, and takes a shortcut driving through
something in the field punctures a small I
shuts down the engine before it is ruined,
SOLUTION: The driver first used the spare
since he knew that the water would even
needed something to plug the hole or a
tor. There was nothing the team could u
the end of the rally was in sight. The drive
ing the radiator with fluids—-by urinating36 • INSIDE THE BOX
Problem 4: The Failing Clutch
In the middle of the final day of the race, the clutch starts slipping.
Although the end of the race is almost in sight, the team is exhausted
after completing almost three grueling days. Yet it has to keep the car
going.
SOLUTION: The driver recalled how sticky Coca-Cola is when it spills. He
stopped the car on the side of the road and emptied the windscreen
washer bottle of its liquid. He then removed the hose that connects
the bottle to the windscreen, and redirected it so that it pointed at the
clutch. Meanwhile, the codriver poured the soda into the windscreen
washer bottle. Every time the clutch started to slip, the codriver pulled
on the windscreen washer handle, spraying Coke onto the clutch. The
heat from the clutch caused the beverage to evaporate, leaving a sticky
sugary film, which was sufficient to make the clutch stick for five min-
utes. The codriver repeated this process until the car crossed the finish
line.
Could you spot the common theme here? That's right: each of these
challenges was solved by using a nonobvious component found in the
Closed World of the race car (which included the team members).
NOT ALL SOLUTIONS IN THE CLOSED WORLD ARE CREATIVE (JACOB'S STORY)
The 1995 movie Apollo 13 contains a Closed World scene that puts
viewers on the edge of their seats. "There's one whole side of that
spacecraft missing," Jim Lovell said as the astronauts got their first view
of the damage that had been caused by the explosion. Oxygen tank 2 in
the service module exploded, damaging oxygen tank 1 and blowing off
a bay door. All oxygen stores were lost within about three hours, along
with loss of water, electrical power, and use of the propulsion system.
The astronauts needed a creative solution.
Following the famous "Houston, we have a problem" scene, a team
of engineers gathers to find a way to insert a rectangular filter into a
cylindrical opening. If they fail, carbon dioxide levels in the command
module will reach fatal levels. The head of t
containing objects available to the astrona
need to find a way to make this," he says, lift
fit into a hole made for this," lifting the rou
that," he says, spilling the contents of the bos
I still recall how excited I was when see
time! I whispered to my girlfriend, Anna (nc
like that, all their solutions are bound to be
I thought that this was a perfect example of
at work. After all, the engineers and astronal
but to look inside the spaceship. They were,
I was sure that I was about to win Anna's ete
my foresight and wisdom.
But the engineers came up with a rati
structed the astronauts to connect the two
secured with tape. What a disappointment-
at all! Which just goes to show that not-s
manage to sneak into the Closed World
contenders for the best solution because of
effectiveness. But the point to remember is t
Closed World is an empirically proven and :
that shows that the density of creative idea
side. And this is exactly the space in which
thinking. The next chapters will offer you s
inside this box, because as we see it, althou
small at all.